Hilary Silvia-Goldberg|It's a Nuisance: The Future of Fracking Litigation in the Wake of Parr v. Aruba Petroleum, Inc.| Hilary M Goldberg, Melanie Stallings Williams, Deborah Cours| 2015| Va. Envtl. LJ| 33| | 1| | Hydraulic fracturing, or" fracking," is a polarizing topic, having earned both staunch advocates who see its possibilities for the domestic production of energy and ardent opponents who anticipate dire consequences resulting from its environmental impact. The practice has resulted in over one hundred lawsuits filed by private plaintiffs, none of which have gone to verdict prior to the recent jury decision in Parr v. Aruba Petroleum, Inc. 1 Because its result did not rest on a conclusion that the practice of fracking itself constituted a compensable wrong, Parr neither vindicated the oil and gas industry by exonerating it nor validated critics of fracking. Instead, the decision, based on a single cause of action of intentional private nuisance, demonstrated that juries were willing to find in favor of private plaintiffs even without a showing that fracking itself resulted in direct harm to the lives and property of those living nearby. The jury …
Hilary Silvia-Goldberg|On Parr: The Use and Propriety of Appraisal Methods in Computing Fracking Awards| Hilary M Golberg, Ray Calnan| 2016| JL & Com.| 35| | 55| | Parr v. Aruba Petroleum, Inc.,'made headlines in 2014 for being the first hydraulic fracturing (" Tracking") case to result in a jury verdict. In Parr, a Texas jury awarded $2.925 million to compensate the Parr family for injuries sustained resulting from Aruba Petroleum's nearby fracking activities. Of the nearly $3 million Parr verdict, later reversed on other grounds, the jury awarded $275,000 for diminution in property value. 2 Thanks to the fiercely litigated and highly publicized trial and appeal, scholars, practitioners and academics received a rare glimpse into an area of litigation otherwise insulated from public view by out of court resolutions and confidential settlement agreements. 3 In this interdisciplinary paper, we will provide an overview of the valuation process, addressing issues specific to diminution in value in the context of fracking and similar incidences of environmental contamination. We will then explain the …
Hilary Silvia-Goldberg|Disclosing the Inevitable: Reconciling the Varied Requirements for the Disclosure of Death on Real Property| Hilary M Goldberg| 2018| Notre Dame JL Ethics & Pub. Pol'y| 32| | 183| | Whether or not a property owner is required to disclose to prospective purchasers a death, felony, or other traumatic event on her real property depends, almost entirely, upon where the property is located. Indeed, while many fundamental aspects of Real Estate Law are consistent nationwide, the requirements imposed upon sellers to disclose a death or other psychological element affecting the property vary by state. The proliferation and success of websites, such as DiedInHouse. com, which, for a fee, will provide a report of all deaths that occurred on a particular property, suggest that consumers nationwide want to know whether there has been a death on the property. Countless stories of perpetually vacant homes following notable deaths and violent crimes reinforce this notion. Is there any way to reconcile the competing interests of the buyer who is sensitive to the stigma and the seller facing potential diminution …
Hilary Silvia-Goldberg|Stealing Time: The Propriety of Alleging Common Law Conversion in Modern Wage Theft Lawsuits| Nanci Carr, Hilary Goldberg, Paul Silvia| 2017| | | | | | The words “wage theft” frequently make headlines when workers sue employers for underpayment or nonpayment of wages. Wage theft is “the illegal refusal by an employer to pay a worker the wages and benefits that he or she has legally earned.” In the United States, employer violation of wage and hour laws is a vast and enduring problem affecting as many as two-thirds of workers. In an attempt to combat this epidemic threat to hourly workers’ bottom lines, legislatures have fashioned numerous laws, some even invoking the power of “wage theft” terminology, such as New York’s Wage Theft Prevention Act. However, despite the pervasive usage of the term “wage theft” by the media, politicians, and pundits, a search of the term “wage theft” in legal libraries yields little precedent. This begs the question: can employers be liable for conversion for failing to compensate employees for time-spent working? The efficacy of conversion claims in wage-related lawsuits remains an unsettled question. However, if as a society, we are sounding the alarm in every incidence of possible wage and hour law violations, we ultimately misinform the population of potential plaintiffs regarding the viability of a claim for theft, or conversion, of earned yet unpaid wages.
Hilary Silvia-Goldberg|Stealing Time: The Propriety of Alleging Common Law Conversion in Modern Wage Theft Lawsuits| Hilary M Goldberg, Nanci K Carr, Paul J Silvia| 2017| JL & Com.| 36| | 1| | The words" wage theft" frequently make headlines when workers sue employers for underpayment or nonpayment of wages.'Wage theft is" the illegal refusal by an employer to pay a worker the wages and benefits that he or she has legally earned." 2 In the United States, employer violation of wage and hour laws is a vast and enduring problem affecting as many as two-thirds of workers. In an attempt to combat this epidemic threat to hourly workers' bottom lines, legislatures have fashioned numerous laws, some even invoking the power of" wage theft" terminology, such as New York's Wage
Hilary Silvia-Goldberg|When Does Compensation for'Time Spent Under the Employer's Control'Include Pre and Post Shift Waiting and Other Activities?| Nanci Carr, Hilary Goldberg| 2014/10/1| Southern Journal of Business & Ethics (October 2014)| | | | | In the face of continued economic uncertainly, employers are increasingly turning to temporary staffing to meet immediate workforce needs as a way of filling a current staffing gap without investing in a long-term commitment to an employee. The Fair Labor Standards Act of 1938 requires that employers pay employees, including temporary employees, for all “hours worked,” so the question is what constitutes hours worked for the temporary worker? The answer generally comes down to “time spent under the employer’s control” but what does that mean? Does the employer need to exercise control over the employees’ choices, or just their actions?
Chris Bolsmann |University ranking as social exclusion| Sarah S Amsler, Chris Bolsmann| 2012/3/1| British journal of sociology of education| 33| 2| 283-301| Routledge| In this article we explore the dual role of global university rankings in the creation of a new, knowledge-identified, transnational capitalist class and in facilitating new forms of social exclusion. We examine how and why the practice of ranking universities has become widely defined by national and international organisations as an important instrument of political and economic policy. We consider the development of university rankings into a global business combining social research, marketing and public relations, as a tangible policy tool that narrowly redefines the social purposes of higher education itself. Finally, it looks at how the influence of rankings on national funding for teaching and research constrains wider public debate about the meaning of ‘good' and meaningful education in the United Kingdom and other national contexts, particularly by shifting the debate away from democratic publics upward into the …
Chris Bolsmann |International student recruitment to universities in England: Discourse, rationales and globalisation| Chris Bolsmann, Henry Miller| 2008/3/1| Globalisation, Societies and Education| 6| 1| 75-88| Routledge| The recruitment of international students to universities in England has become a central issue in an era of globalisation for university administrators, senior managers, international offices and heads of schools and faculties. We examine the policy rationales for the recruitment of international students to England. Through the use of in‐depth interviews with key role players at four English universities, we compare the rhetoric, rationales and reasons for the recruitment of international students. A range of discourses can be identified in the recruitment of international students and an economic competition rationale is dominant. This is expressed within the discourse of globalisation.
Chris Bolsmann |Rationales, rhetoric and realities: FIFA’s World Cup in South Africa 2010 and Brazil 2014| Bárbara Schausteck de Almeida, Chris Bolsmann, Wanderley Marchi Junior, Juliano de Souza| 2015/5| International Review for the Sociology of Sport| 50| 3| 265-282| SAGE Publications| The 2010 FIFA World Cup was heralded by mainstream media outlets, the local organisers, the South African government and FIFA as an unequivocal success. The month-long spectacle saw South Africa take centre stage and host the world’s largest single sporting event. This occurred against a backdrop of rationales and promises made that the event would leave lasting legacies for all, in particular marginalised South Africans. The reality is quite different. In this article we consider the South African World Cup in the build up to Brazil 2014. We argue that the rationales and rhetoric are similar in both countries and suggest the reality for Brazil 2014 will be the same as South Africa 2010 in that the mega-event will be primarily funded by significant public investment, while the primary beneficiaries will be private capital and FIFA.
Chris Bolsmann |South Africa and the global game: football, apartheid and beyond| Peter Alegi, Chris Bolsmann| 2013/10/18| | | | | Routledge| Part 1: Past is prologue: history of football in South Africa 1. Football as code: the social diffusion of'soccer'in South Africa
Chris Bolsmann |Soccer, South Africa and celebrity status: Mark Fish, popular culture and the post‐apartheid state| Chris Bolsmann, Andrew Parker| 2007/1/1| Soccer & Society| 8| 1| 109-124| Routledge| The rise of celebrity culture is a theme that has attracted a significant amount of attention within both mainstream sociology and cultural studies in more recent times. Ensuing debate has identified contemporary sports figures as an important facet of the celebrity‐media nexus and as possible signifiers of cultural change. In this paper we take one particular sports celebrity, South African soccer star Mark Fish, and evaluate his image in relation to debates surrounding sport, politics and the post‐apartheid state. We argue that because Fish appears to enjoy all the benefits of celebrity status (within his home country at least), an analysis of his career and identity provide a useful means by which to think about the changing political and nationalistic values within South African society.
Chris Bolsmann |White football in South Africa: Empire, apartheid and change, 1892–1977| Chris Bolsmann| 2010/1/1| Soccer & Society| 11| 1-2| 29-45| Routledge| This essay traces the development, domination and decline of white football in South Africa. It suggests that white football was more significant and popular than generally acknowledged and was at the forefront of globalizing football in the early twentieth century. In order to better understand the broader history of twentieth‐century South African football, a more detailed examination of the organized white game at the national and international levels is necessary. This historical analysis of elite white football draws from the archives of the Football Association of South Africa. The analysis underscores the important role of white football authorities in the contestation of power and identity in the game in South Africa and abroad. In the first period under consideration (1892–1940s), local football authorities challenged the dominant sports within South Africa. This period was followed in the 1950s by the challenges of …
Chris Bolsmann |Africa's World Cup: critical reflections on play, patriotism, spectatorship, and space| Peter Alegi, Chris Bolsmann| 2013/5/16| | | | | University of Michigan Press| Africa’s World Cup: Critical Reflections on Play, Patriotism, Spectatorship, and Spacefocuses on a remarkable month in the modern history of Africa and in the global history of football. Peter Alegi and Chris Bolsmann are well-known experts on South African football, and they have assembled an impressive team of local and international journalists, academics, and football experts to reflect on the 2010 World Cup and its broader significance, its meanings, complexities, and contradictions. The World Cup’s sounds, sights, and aesthetics are explored, along with questions of patriotism, nationalism, and spectatorship in Africa and around the world. Experts on urban design and communities write on how the presence of the World Cup worked to refashion urban spaces and negotiate the local struggles in the hosting cities. The volume is richly illustrated by authors’ photographs, and the essays in this volume feature chronicles of match day experiences; travelogues; ethnographies of fan cultures; analyses of print, broadcast, and electronic media coverage of the tournament; reflections on the World Cup’s private and public spaces; football exhibits in South African museums; and critiques of the World Cup’s processes of inclusion and exclusion, as well as its political and economic legacies. The volume concludes with a forum on the World Cup, including Thabo Dladla, Director of Soccer at the University of KwaZulu-Natal, Mohlomi Kekeletso Maubane, a well-known Soweto-based writer and a soccer researcher, and Rodney Reiners, former professional footballer and current chief soccer writer for the Cape Argus newspaper in Cape Town. This …
Chris Bolsmann |Representation in the first African World Cup:‘world-class’, Pan-Africanism, and exclusion| Chris Bolsmann| 2012/3/1| Soccer & Society| 13| 2| 156-172| Routledge| This paper explores the representation of the first African World Cup in the British and South African press. Drawing on the output of a variety of media outlets between 2004, when South Africa was awarded the right to host the 2010 event, and the culmination of the tournament in July 2010, this paper contends that a range of representations of Africa have been put forward by the British and South African media. These can be interpreted as alarmist, sensationalist and even racist in certain extreme instances, and hypernationalist and overly defensive in other cases.
Chris Bolsmann |The 1899 Orange Free State football team tour of Europe:‘Race’, imperial loyalty and sporting contest| Chris Bolsmann| 2011/1/1| The International Journal of the History of Sport| 28| 1| 81-97| Routledge| In September 1899 an association football team from Bloemfontein in the Orange Free State, South Africa, arrived in the United Kingdom. The team comprised 16 black South Africans who played under the auspices of the whites-only Orange Free State Football Association and was the first ever South African football team to tour abroad. In a four-month tour the team played 49 matches against opposition in England, France, Ireland, Scotland and Wales. A small but growing body of work focuses on black sport and football in particular and the 1899 tour is referred to in passing in a few publications, although none have attempted to uncover details of the team or the matches that were played in Europe. This article attempts to do this by drawing on a range of sources in South Africa and the United Kingdom and argues the case for the significance of this team for football history in general and South African sports …
Chris Bolsmann |Pre-empting the challenges of transformation and marketisation of higher education: a case study of the Rand Afrikaans University| Chris Bolsmann, Tina Uys| 2001/7/1| Society in Transition| 32| 2| 173-185| Taylor & Francis Group| With the advent of the marketisation of higher education and the change to a democratic dispensation, South African universities find themselves facing budgetary constraints that need to be reconciled with the transformation of previous bastions of elitism into institutions accommodating and representing all South Africans. The Rand Afrikaans University (RAU) was founded in 1967 to provide Christian National education for white working-class Afrikaans-speaking students and its first vice-chancellor was a leading member of the Broederbond. Although this ethos tended to dominate university policy and practices until fairly recently, the university has at the same time been involved in innovations with regard to teaching since its inception. This paper focuses on recent changes that have taken place at RAU. It analyses the role of marketisation in facilitating changes in the student composition and forms of delivery in …
Chris Bolsmann |South Africa and the global game: Introduction| Peter Alegi, Chris Bolsmann| 2010/1/1| Soccer & Society| 11| 1-2| 1-11| Routledge| On 10 May 1994, the festivities for Nelson Mandela’s presidential inauguration included a soccer match between South Africa and Zambia at Ellis Park in Johannesburg. At halftime, Mandela’s helicopter landed on the pitch. As the president stepped out onto the grass, the huge crowd erupted in a thunderous roar. When play resumed, the South Africans seemed electrified and went on to win the match 2-1. On 15 May 2004 in Zurich, Switzerland, Mandela wept with joy when the Fédération Internationale de Football Association (FIFA) awarded South Africa the right to host the 2010 World Cup. South Africans celebrated in the streets as if they had not simply won hosting rights, but the World Cup itself!‘To some extent this outburst of euphoria surpassed 1994’, commented Ahmed Kathrada, the former political prisoner incarcerated with Mandela for 26 years;‘The scenes of jubilation, the spontaneous outpouring of …
Chris Bolsmann |Mexico 1968 and South Africa 2010: development, leadership and legacies| Chris Bolsmann, Keith Brewster| 2009/12/1| Sport in Society| 12| 10| 1284-1298| Taylor & Francis Group| In this essay we compare the rationales for hosting the 1968 Olympic Games in Mexico City with the FIFA World Cup 2010 to be held in South Africa. We draw on in-depth interviews, archival materials and a range of press coverage. We argue that three broad overlapping themes are apparent in both case studies. These are the developmental rhetoric both hosts employ in the justification of holding the events in their respective countries. Mexico and South Africa convey a leadership role that stretches across the South American and African continent respectively. Finally, both countries argue that the legacy the respective tournament leaves is important.
Chris Bolsmann |South African football tours at the turn of the twentieth century: Amateurs, pioneers and profits| Chris Bolsmann| 2010/6/1| African Historical Review| 42| 1| 91-112| Taylor & Francis Group| Academic and popular studies of South African sport generally reveal a bias towards cricket and rugby and this perpetuates the myth that these games are the most popular in South Africa. This in turn is often viewed through the lens of ‘race’ in which the simplifications of sport along racial lines occur. This paper argues that football was more important in South Africa among all South Africans in the late 19th and early 20th century than has been previously acknowledged. It reveals that not only was the game important and popular in South Africa but its teams and administrators played a significant role in globalising the game during this period. Tours to and from South Africa were important politically, financially and for sporting reasons. Five ground breaking football tours took place during a ten year period and these serve as the basis of discussion in this paper.
Chris Bolsmann |From Apartheid to unity: White capital and black power in the racial integration of South African football, 1976–1992| Peter Alegi, Chris Bolsmann| 2010/6/1| African Historical Review| 42| 1| 1-18| Taylor & Francis Group| This article analyses the complex process that deracialised and democratised South African football between the early 1970s and 1990s. Based mainly on archival documents, it argues that growing isolation from world sport, exemplified by South Africa's expulsion from the Olympic movement in 1970 and FIFA in 1976, and the reinvigoration of the liberation struggle with the Soweto youth uprising triggered a process of gradual desegregation in the South African professional game. While Pretoria viewed such changes as a potential bulwark against rising black militancy, white football and big business had their own reasons for eventually supporting racial integration, as seen in the founding of the National Soccer League. As negotiations for a new democratic South Africa began in earnest between the African National Congress (ANC) and the National Party (NP) in the latter half of the 1980s, transformations …
Chris Bolsmann |Improving colorectal cancer screening: a partnership between primary care practices and the American Cancer Society| Michael B Potter, Yaser Namvargolian, Jimmy Hwang, Judith ME Walsh| 2009/3/1| Journal of Cancer Education| 24| 1| 22| Springer-Verlag| Background. The American Cancer Society (ACS) is interested in facilitating colorectal cancer screening (CRCS) in primary care. Methods. Similar clinics were assigned randomly to 1 of 3 CRCS arms: (1) usual care, (2) exam-room posters designed by the ACS; and (3) posters plus patient reminder calls from an ACS volunteer. Results. Compared to patients due for screening in Arm 1, the odds ratio for getting CRCS in Arm 2 was 1.04 (95% confidence interval [CI], 0.81–1.34), P value not significant; in Arm 3, it was 1.49 (95% CI, 1.16–1.90), P value < .001. Conclusions. Exam-room posters plus patient reminder calls from the ACS can increase CRCS in primary care.
Chris Bolsmann |Professional Football in Apartheid South Africa: Leisure, Consumption and Identity in the National Football League, 1959–1977| Chris Bolsmann| 2013/10/1| The International Journal of the History of Sport| 30| 16| 1947-1961| Routledge| A growing body of academic and popular literature considers the history of South African football. These and existing publications pay little or no attention to the emergence of white professional football in apartheid South Africa. The National Football League (NFL) challenged the amateur game and introduced professional football to the country. During its 17-year existence, the NFL grew each season with large attendances until its demise in 1977. In addition, the NFL imported a range of international players, invited foreign teams and actively engaged in the political debates in South African sport at the time. The NFL was instrumental in popularising the game across the country for all South Africans. The NFL became the most popular sports entertainment of choice for South Africans during this period. Finally, the NFL actively engaged in a campaign of destroying rival non-racial anti-apartheid leagues while …
Chris Bolsmann |Mexico 1968 and South Africa 2010: Sombreros and Vuvuzelas and the Legitimisation of Global Sporting Events| Chris Bolsmann| 2010/3| Bulletin of Latin American Research| 29| | 93-106| Blackwell Publishing Ltd| I aim to demonstrate in this chapter the utility of comparing Mexico’s experience in 1968 with that of South Africa’s hosting of the 2010 Fédération Internationale de Football Association (FIFA) World Cup and its precursor, the FIFA Confederations Cup staged in 2009. In large measure, South Africa’s preparations for hosting the 2010 World Cup presented similar hurdles to those confronted by Mexico 40 years earlier. What I believe this comparative approach reveals is that the two countries not only shared common experiences as a result of having to stage mega-sports-events, but that their experiences show similarities explicitly because they were viewed as somehow falling short of expectations set by the ‘Western world’. Additionally, as we shall see, the rare opportunity afforded the two states in hosting these events fostered a fundamental debate within each country concerning projection of itself and its role in the …
Chris Bolsmann |Trade-union internationalism and solidarity in the struggle against apartheid: A Case Study of Volkswagen| Chris Bolsmann| 2007/4/1| Historical Studies in Industrial Relations| | 23-24| 103-124| Liverpool University Press| By the 1970s, the struggle against apartheid had intensified within South Africa and abroad. Eddie Webster has argued that this struggle ‘became the moral equivalent of the Spanish civil war… with democrats, liberals, communists and concerned Christians united in common abhorrence of white domination’. 1 This article focuses on the trade-union internationalism and solidarity that emerged between South African and German trade-unionists in the fight against apartheid in a major German trans-national corporation (TNC). The relationships that developed in terms of the overlapping and convergence of economic, political and institutional interests that inform actions are studied. 2 Two distinct phases are identified. First, the emergence in the latter part of the 1970s of direct shop-floor and official links between South African and German trade-unionists, informed by the economic and institutional interests of the …
Chris Bolsmann |Globalisation, the market university and support service outsourcing in South Africa: Class struggle, convergence and difference, 1994–2001| Lucien van der Walt, Chris Bolsmann, Bernadette Johnson, Lindsey Martin| 2003/7/1| Society in Transition| 34| 2| 272-294| Taylor & Francis Group| ‘Globalisation’ is all too often understood as a monolithic process that produces broadly similar outcomes in a wide range of settings. This examination of the impact of globalisation on the restructuring of public sector universities in South Africa in the 1990s demonstrates that the picture is far more complex. Over the last thirty years, globalisation has been intertwined with neoliberal capitalist economic and ideological restructuring. This is refracted, in the first instance, through State policy, and, in the second, through specific local sites of power relations and class struggles that are, in turn, structured by the resources and responses of different actors. While the neoliberal component of globalisation has played a decisive role in shaping State higher education policy in South Africa, the actual implementation of the model of the market-orientated university receiving minimal support from a deficit conscious State has …
Chris Bolsmann |Contesting labor internationalism: The “old” trapped in the “new” in Volkswagen’s South African plant| Chris Bolsmann| 2010/12| Labor Studies Journal| 35| 4| 520-539| SAGE Publications| During the 1970s and 1980s, close linkages were established between unionists in Volkswagen’s Uitenhage plant in South Africa and Wolfsburg in Germany. The ensuing relationship resulted in trade union internationalism and solidarity with South African workers in their struggle against apartheid. After the insertion of the South African plant into the global production networks of the company, a range of new pressures and challenges confronted the union in South Africa. This resulted in the mass dismissal in 2000. In an attempt to garner international support and solidarity, the dismissed workers tapped into existing structures with no success, illustrating the reconfiguration of trade union internationalism away from worker interests to those of the unions and company.
Chris Bolsmann |International student recruitment: South African rationales| Chris Bolsmann, Henry Miller| 2008| Journal of Higher Education in Africa/Revue de l'enseignement supérieur en Afrique| 6| 2-3| 211-231| CODESRIA| In this paper, we focus on the rationales for the recruitment of international students to universities in South Africa. Through the use of in-depth interviews with international officers at a cross-section of South African universities, we argue that there are competing and complementary rationales for the recruitment of international students. Some South African universities follow international trends in terms of international student recruitment while others adopt a different approach. The analysis locates the rationales of international student recruitment as part of an internationalisation process within the context of globalisation.
Chris Bolsmann |Dominions Apart: Scandal and Sporting Mismatch in Australian–South African Association Football Encounters, 1947–1955| Chris Bolsmann, Nick Guoth| 2012/3/1| The International Journal of the History of Sport| 29| 3| 472-491| Routledge| South Africa, Australia and New Zealand participated in numerous sporting contests prior to World War Two. These encounters were primarily on cricket pitches and rugby fields. After nearly four decades of negotiations the first Association football matches were played between the three countries in 1947. The first tour of South Africa to Australia and New Zealand was plagued by scandals on and off the pitch, but despite this Australia returned the favour and toured South Africa three years later. Another five years would pass before South African returned to Australia, by which time it was clear that a large gulf had emerged between the two nations in terms of sporting ability and organisational efficiency. This article focuses on the three tours of 1947, 1950 and 1955, dissecting each as they occurred against a backdrop of scandal, organisational inefficiency and sporting mismatch.
Chris Bolsmann |Globalisation and the Outsourced University in South Africa: The restructuring of the support services in public sector universities in South Africa, 1994-2001'| L Van der Walt, C Bolsmann, B Johnson, L Martin| 2002| Chet Report| | | | | 
Chris Bolsmann |“Why Play Cricket…?”: A Preliminary Analysis of Participation by Young Males| Martin Toms, Scott Fleming| 1995/5/1| | 15| 1| 89-106| Taylor & Francis Group| For almost a decade there has been considerable debate and discussion about the roles and relative importance of school-based and club-based cricket in the development of elite young male cricketers;4 and state schools have often been accused of failing to provide Britain's youth with an adequate introduction to the fundamentals of the game.5 The recent Political intervention into debates about the place of team games in the schooling of young people has further fanned the flames, and in spite of the success of the England women's team, cricket is now, once again, in the spotlight. Indeed, so much so, that cricket has been identified by the Sports Council as a ‘focus sport’.6
Chris Bolsmann |‘Here Come “Chelsea” of Sweden’: Djurgården Football Club on Tour in Apartheid South Africa| Hans Bolling, Chris Bolsmann| 2013/9/1| Sport in History| 33| 3| 353-372| Routledge| In this article we argue that while apartheid, boycotts and South African sport have received significant coverage and focus, this has primarily been restricted to Britain and former white colonies of the Commonwealth such as Australia and New Zealand. In addition, sports such as cricket and rugby receive most attention. We argue that it is useful to consider other countries and sports engaged in apartheid South Africa. We consider Swedish engagement with apartheid South Africa and focus the case study of our analysis on the tour by champions Djurgården to the country in 1955. The tourists received favourable and widespread support in South Africa and Sweden. Yet towards the end of the tour sections of the Swedish press asked critical and probing questions of the club's tour to South Africa. We contend that the tour can be viewed as naïve and apolitical and in a similar vein to the organization of Swedish sports …
Chris Bolsmann |The Outsourced University| Lucien Van der Walt, C Bolsman, Bernadette Johnson, Lindsey Martin| 1994| | 2001| | | A survey of the rise of support service outsourcing in public sector higher education in South African and its effects on workers and trade unions| The “transformation” of the public sector universities in post-apartheid South Africa remains at the centre of government’s political commitments, policy formation processes, and public debate. 1 Yet one aspect of university restructuring has received surprisingly little attention: the trend towards the outsourcing of support service functions in the 1990s. Although the conflicts arising from this process caught the public eye on a number of occasions, most notably the controversy surrounding the restructuring of the support services at the University of the Witwatersrand in 2000, there has been no thorough study of the rise and effects of support service outsourcing in South Africa. The few studies that exist tend to be brief, sometimes journalistic, and generally confined to an examination of a single institution. By comparison, issues such as curriculum restructuring, university governance,“marketisation” and the proposed mergers and disestablishment of a number of institutions have been the subject of a great deal of public analysis, not to mention political conflict. 2 This paper provides an overview of the process of support service outsourcing across the public sector universities, and examines the effects of this process on workers and their trade unions. Our focus is on the period 1994 to 2001. By support services, we refer, in particular, to those manual and menial campus occupations that do not contribute directly towards knowledge production but which are, nonetheless, essential to the functioning of the universities. These occupations include catering, cleaning, grounds and building maintenance, security services and transport. The paper situates this …
Chris Bolsmann |Taking South African sport seriously| Chris Bolsmann, Cora Burnett| 2015/1/2| | 46| 1| 1-6| Routledge| Twenty years on, the image of Nelson Mandela, wearing the number six jersey of the white Springbok captain, Francois Pienaar, remains a poignant moment in South African and global sport. The 1995 Rugby World Cup victory by the overwhelmingly all-white Springboks remains a powerful symbol in post-apartheid South Africa. Clint Eastwood’s (2009) Hollywood film, Invictus, based on John Carlin’s Playing the enemy: Nelson Mandela and the game that made a nation (2008), has dramatised the significance of Mandela wearing the jersey and the South African victory. The formerly exclusive symbol was seemingly appropriated and made socially inclusive and became part of the lexicon and rhetoric of nation building post-1994. For Ashwin Desai (2010: 1), rugby had become ‘the sport that would help to catalyse the building of a “rainbow nation” predicated on a common identity, a common sense of “South …
Chris Bolsmann |A copa do mundo Fifa na África do Sul/2010–como foi a experiência e o que podemos aprender com ela?| Wanderley Marchi Júnior, Chris Bolsmann, Bárbara Schausteck de Almeida, Juliano de Souza| 2014| Movimento| 20| 2| | Escola de Educação Física| In this essay, we intend to discuss some social
logics not explicit that articulate the domain of the FIFA
World Cup. Therefore, the 2010 edition of this event is used
as analytical approach to reveal some of the rhetoric and
strategic actions that permeated the context of its realization.
Based on data obtained in the academic literature and media,
we present that the motivations for the event were based on
developmental discourses by both FIFA as well as local elites
South African aiming to convince different social groups
and conquer their support. However, the consequences
are not necessarily those promised, and these institutions
were the real benefciaries in their economic and political
mutual interests. At this point, we argue that Brazilian society
can and should learn from the experience of South Africa
to assess critically the motives less apparent to host such
events.
Key-words:
Mega-events. Football. FIFA World Cup. South
Africa 2010.
728
E
nsaios
Wanderley Marchi Júnior et al.
, Porto Alegre, v. 20, n. 2, p. 711-733, abr./jun. de 2014.
El Mundial FIFA Sudáfrica 2010:¿ Cómo fue la experiencia
y qué es posible aprender con ella?
Resumen:
En este ensayo se pretende discutir algunas
lógicas sociales no explícitas que se articulan en el ámbito
de la realización del Mundial de la FIFA. Por lo tanto, nos
centramos como enfoque analítico la edición de 2010
de este evento, para revelar algunas de las retóricas y
acciones estratégicas que impregnaran el contexto de su
preparación en Sudáfrica. Con base en los datos obtenidos
en la literatura académica y los medios de comunicación, se
presenta como motivaciones para el evento se presentaban
los discursos …
Chris Bolsmann |South Africa and the Global Game: Football, Apartheid and Beyond| Chris Bolsmann, Peter Alegi| 2010| | | | | Routledge| 
Chris Bolsmann |Solidarity and Identity: Volkswagen Workers in South Africa and Germany| Chris Bolsmann| 2006| Globalisation and new identities: A view from the middle| | | 137-55| Jacana Media| THE FOCUS OF this chapter is on worker identity within a trans-national corporation (TNC). This is related to international trade union solidarity, within Volkswagen AG'(VWAG). The connections between identity and solidarity are complex and the two ideas cannot be regarded as synonymous; rather they influence each other during two different periods under consideration. The chapter traces the 20 year relationship and solidarity displayed between the two trade unions organising in Germany and South Africa respectively, namely IG MetalP and the National Union of Metalworkers of South Africa (NUMSA). The first contact was initiated in the late 1970s and the ensuing links have developed over the last two decades. The central claim of this chapter is that two broad overlapping periods of interaction can be identified. The nature of these relations affects the forms of solidarity displayed by participants and the manner in which they relate to and interact with one another in terms of trade union internationalism. In the first section of this chapter, the analytical framework for understanding solidarity is explored. Solidarity is understood as action that benefits Volkswagen of South Africa (VWSA) employees and trade unionists and broader activity against the apartheid state. This is interpreted against the backdrop of a specific form of trade union internationalism during apartheid. In the second section, specific themes related to the above periods which emerged from semi structured in-
Chris Bolsmann |White football in South Africa: empire, apartheid and change, 1892—1977| Chris Bolsmann| 2013/10/18| South Africa and the Global Game: Football, Apartheid and Beyond| | | 29| Routledge| This essay traces the development, domination and decline of white football in South Africa. It suggests that white football was more signiﬁcant and popular than generally acknowledged and was at the forefront of globalizing football in the early twentieth century. In order to better understand the broader history of twentieth-century South African football, a more detailed examination of the organized white game at the national and international levels is necessary. This historical analysis of elite white football draws from the archives of the Football Association of South Africa. The analysis underscores the important role of white football authorities in the contestation of power and identity in the game in South Africa and abroad. In the ﬁrst period under consideration (1892—19405), local football authorities challenged the dominant sports within South Africa. This period was followed in the 1950s by the challenges of professionalism and antiapartheid organizations. In the ﬁnal phase (1967—77), ofﬁcials experimented with football on ‘multi-national’and multi-racial lines—a failed reform that led to the demise of white football.
This essay traces the development, domination and decline of organized white football in South Africa. 1 It suggests that white football was more signiﬁcant and popular than generally acknowledged. In order to better understand the broader history of twentieth-century South African football, a more detailed examination of the organized white game at the national and international levels is necessary. 2 The objective of this analysis is to highlight three main periods of elite white football and reveal a number of contradictions along …
Chris Bolsmann |To Sing or Not to Sing? National Anthems, Football Obsessions and Bafana Bafana's World Cup| Chris Bolsmann| 2013| Africa's Soccer World Cup: Critical Reflections on Play, Patriotism, Spectatorship, and Space, eds. Chris Bolsmann and Peter Alegi (Ann Arbor: University of Michigan Press, 2013)| | | 109-118| | 
Chris Bolsmann |Review Essay on Peter Alegi, Laduma! Soccer, Politics and Society in South Africa| Chris Bolsmann| 2006/4/1| Soccer & Society| 7| 2-3| 292-299| Routledge| With the readmission of South African football into the international fold in 1992, a new phase began in the nation’s sporting history. In football, the euphoria continued with the national team winning the 1996 African Cup of Nations and participating in two World Cups in France in 1998 and Japan and South Korea in 2002. In addition to staging the 1996 African Cup of Nations, the most important football competition, the FIFA World Cup will be held in the country in 2010. Despite the abovementioned successes, relatively few studies have focussed on South African football. Mark Gleeson, South Africa’s foremost football writer and commentator, notes in his forward to the book Laduma! Soccer, Politics and Society in South Africa that ‘a general apathy with regard to the history of sport and its role in the development of South African society has ensured that this country does not possess a formal history of its football …
Chris Bolsmann |Globalisation and the Outsourced University in South Africa| Lucien Van der Walt, C Bolsman, Bernadette Johnson, Lindsey Martin| 2002/7| Final Report for CHET. University of Witwatersrand| | | | | The “transformation” of public sector universities in the post-apartheid period has been a key focus of the new government’s reformist policy initiatives. On the one hand, the government has sought to break down racialised divisions in the sector between Historically Advantaged Institutions (HAIs) and Historically Disadvantaged Institutions (HDIs), to make the staff and student bodies more “representative” of the country as a whole, and to make the universities more accountable to its national and developmental priorities. On the other hand, government’s initiatives have taken place within the dual constraints of its own conservative macro-economic policy model, embodied in the Growth, Employment and Redistribution strategy (GEAR), and the broader challenges imposed by neo-liberal globalisation.
Within this context, the transformation of public sector universities in the post-apartheid period has not proceeded in a smooth or monolithic manner. Rather, there have been many transformations, with different winners and losers, in the sector over the past decade, transformations shaped by the new global ideology of university “marketisation,” by the fiscal constraints of government’s macro-economic policy, by continued divisions between HAIs ands HDIs, and by divisions within universities by race and class and occupation. In this research paper, we examine one of these transformations: the restructuring and outsourcing of university support service functions in the 1990s. Even if some of the conflicts that have arisen from this process have caught the public eye-notably during the controversial restructuring of support services at the University of the …
Chris Bolsmann |English Gentlemen and World Soccer: Corinthians, Amateurism and the Global Game| Chris Bolsmann, Dilwyn Porter| 2018/4/19| | | | | Routledge| Association football is a global phenomenon. Fédération Internationale de Football Association (FIFA), its governing body, currently has 211 countries in membership. In 2014, the sixty-four matches played by the thirty-two national teams competing in the final stages of the World Cup tournament in Brazil attracted a total attendance of almost 3.5 million spectators while reaching an estimated 2.1 billion television viewers worldwide.‘Soccer’, as we shall mostly call it so as to distinguish it from other forms of football, has come a long way from Kennington Oval, London, where the first international match was contested between England and Scotland in 1872 in front of 2,500 enthusiasts. 1 It was once commonplace to argue that it spread from Britain to the rest of the world by a relatively uncomplicated process
Chris Bolsmann |The 2010 World Cup in South Africa. A Continental Spectacle?| Chris Bolsmann| 2014/4/30| | | | 372-388| Wallstein Verlag| The iconic image of former South African President Nelson Mandela holding the FIFA World Cup trophy is indelibly etched into the collective memory of football-loving South Africans and citizens across the globe. The photograph was taken at the headquarters of FIFA overlooking the city of Zurich on 15 May 2004. Mandela’s instantly recognisable smile adorned television screens and newspapers across the globe as FIFA announced that the hosts of the 2010 World Cup would be South Africa. 1 An African host was guaranteed the showpiece event after the controversial and contested decision to grant Germany the right to host the 2006 tournament. Despite South Africa being favourites to land the 2010 event, this was not guaranteed. The awarding of the 2010 event to South Africa was long-overdue recognition of Africa’s contribution to the world’s game. It represented an affirmation that an African host could stage …
Chris Bolsmann |Sport and Post-Apartheid South Africa: Revisiting The Race Game| Chris Bolsmann| 2014| Journal of Sport History| 41| 2| 331-338| University of Illinois Press| In 1999, Douglas Booth’s The Race Game: Sport and Politics in South Africa was awarded the North American Society for Sport History book award. 1 The Race Game remains an essential text that considers sport and politics in apartheid and post-apartheid South Africa. Twenty years on from the first free and fair democratic elections in South Africa, sport remains a useful lens, in terms of transformation and redress, through which to consider South African society more broadly. Booth noted early in The Race Game that “segregated sport was one of the most visible racial policies” in pre-1994 South Africa (p. 4). Issues of legislated discrimination and segregation no longer beset South African sport, yet race in sport remains an important component of South African society more broadly
Chris Bolsmann |FIFA World Cup in South Africa 2010: how was this experience and what can we learn with it?| Júnior Marchi, Chris Bolsmann, Barbara Schausteck de Almeida, J de Souza| 2014| Movimento| 20| 2| 711-733| Universidade Federal do Rio Grande do Sul| In this essay, we intend to discuss some social logics not explicit that articulate the domain of the FIFA World Cup. Therefore, the 2010 edition of this event is used as analytical approach to reveal some of the rhetoric and strategic actions that permeated the context of its realization. Based on data obtained in the academic literature and media, we present that the motivations for the event were based on developmental discourses by both FIFA as well as local elites South African aiming to convince different social groups and conquer their support. However, the consequences are not necessarily those promised, and these institutions were the real beneficiaries in their economic and political mutual interests. At this point, we argue that Brazilian society can and should learn from the experience of South Africa south africa Subject Category: Geographic Entities
Chris Bolsmann |Los rankings como forma de evaluación| Hebe Irene Roig| 2012| Seminario Las universidades latinoamericanas ante los rankings internacionales: impactos alcances y límites, México DF, UNAM| 17| | | | Agradezco mucho la invitación que me han hecho para participar en este encuentro tan importante para nuestras universidades. Vengo del campo de la pedagogía y mi interés es la evaluación como una posible herramienta de cambio y mejora de las instituciones educativas, de ahí la importancia de analizar el impacto de las diferentes formas de evaluación.
Chris Bolsmann |South Africa and the global game: football, apartheid and beyond.| P Alegi, C Bolsmann| 2010| Soccer and Society| 11| 1/2| 1-180| Taylor & Francis| This interdisciplinary collection sheds new light on South Africa south africa Subject Category: Geographic Entities
Chris Bolsmann |Roundtable: The FIFA World Cup 2010 in the news| Peter Alegi, Chris Bolsmann, Simon Kuper, Rodney Reiners, John Turnbull| 2010/1/1| Ecquid Novi: African Journalism Studies| 31| 2| 225| | Despite the presence and achievements of individual African footballers in Europe’s top leagues and the improvements in communication technology (the Internet and satellite television, among others), African football remains offlimits and a mystery to most Western media observers as well as Western fans. 1 Selective and deficient media coverage of the continental game also has much to do with it. Consequently, before the 2010 World Cup, South Africa still remained a closed book to many. Only a few journalists and researchers have bucked the trend, writing about African football in its entirety. Before the World Cup, Peter Alegi, probably the foremost historian of African football, gathered a panel of journalists and researchers to discuss the significance of the World Cup for the African continent. Their comments in January 2010, as recorded here for this special FIFA World Cup 2010 edition of Ecquid Novi: African …
Chris Bolsmann |Students interviewing students: the Aston University—Hong Kong project| Agnieszka Ignatowicz, Chris Bolsmann, Henry Miller| 2009/7/1| Enhancing learning in the social sciences| 2| 1| 1-23| Routledge| This article provides an account of undergraduate sociology students conducting indepth interviews with international students from Hong Kong. The research is locating in a broader project of identifying rationales for the recruitment of international students. One of the shortcomings of previous research was that the student voice and rationale were missing. We have addressed this by involving undergraduate researchers in the collection and analysis of data. This project report draws on one of the reflections of the student researcher.
Chris Bolsmann |The double-digit strike| E Vlok, C Bolsmann| 1999| South African Labour Bulletin| 23| | 21-28| UMANYANO PUBLICATIONS| 
Chris Bolsmann |Three Clubs in Search of a City: Professional Soccer in Los Angeles, 1973–2018| Chris Bolsmann, George N Kioussis| 2019/4/1| Journal of Sport History| 46| 1| 98-114| University of Illinois Press| In 2016, Los Angeles Football Club (LAFC) celebrated its birth before a public audience at Union Station. The club’s posturing on the day, and in its efforts more broadly, was that it offered the local market something new. Yet while the claim to originality was a tacit acknowledgment that the city had a footballing past, rarely has this past been explored in the relevant historiography. Thus, the founding of LAFC presents a timely moment to fill in the scholarly gap. This article uses LAFC as an entry point for exploring the contours of professional soccer in Los Angeles over the previous half-century. It follows three sides—the Los Angeles Aztecs, Los Angeles Galaxy, and Los Angeles Football Club—in their attempts to navigate the city’s built and sociocultural environment.
Chris Bolsmann |Left Field| Chris Bolsmann, Dilwyn Porter, RB Alaway, CW Alcock, J Catton, BO Corbett, FNS Creek, FNS Creek, A Figueiredo, CB Fry, BO Corbett, CB Fry, A Gibson, W Pickford, A Gibson, W Pickford, EL Holland, KRG Hunt, KRG Hunt, Sir Godfrey Ince, NL Jackson, NL Jackson, NL Jackson, K Jones, S Leslie, F Lillywhite, R Lloyd, T Mazzoni, W Meisl, FH Milnes, Nederlansche Voetbalbund, E Needham, GA Parker, W Pickford, JJ Rahilly, R Robinson, GO Smith, Montague Shearman, Sir F Wall, RAJ Ward, R Allaway, L Allison, J Amery, P Bailey, A Bateman, PJ Beck, A Bellos, DR Black, J Nauright, G Bocketti, K Booth, M van Bottenburg, M Bragg, M Brown, PJ Cain, AG Hopkins, A Campomar, N Carter, R Cavallini, R Cavallini, R Cavallini, DI Chapman, M Collins, T Collins, RA Crampsey, JM dos Santos Neto, E Dunning, K Sheard, J Eastwood, T Moyse, N Fishwick, M Filho, CT Gaffney, D Goldblatt, E Grayson, G Green, G Green, WE Greenland, A Hamilton, G Hare, N Havemann, U Hess-Lichtenberger, R Holt, R Holt, M Huggins, B Ingrassia, N Jacobs, M Johnes, L Jones, M Joyce, C Kerrigan, C Koller, F Brändle, J Lacey, P Lanfranchi, M Taylor, D Lange, JS Lee, D Lemmon, M Marshall, J Lowerson, A Markovits, S Hellerman, D Marrow, K Wamsley, T Mason, T Mason, T Mason, E Riedi, ML McDowell, R McKibbin, W Meisl, C Merrett, J Mills, J Mills, A Mitchell, T Morris, E Nielsen, E Parker, N Piercey, D Russell, I Sharpe, MI Smith, B Tabner, C Taylor, DJ Taylor, M Taylor, M Taylor, W Vamplew, J Walvin, D Wangerin, C Weir, MJ Wiener, I Wilton, D Zec, F Baljkas, M Paunović, D Allen, J Benson, C Bolsmann, C Bolsmann, C Bolsmann, M van Bottenburg, D Brown, M Deléphine, H Gillmeister, S Hardy, S Hardy, B Norman, S Sceery| 2018/11/9| | 3| 2| 1-19| UNISA Press| Various ways in which the Corinthian legacy remains apparent, mainly through the existence of successor clubs operating at various levels of the game in England since 1945, are surveyed with particular emphasis on the Corinthian-Casuals and Pegasus. Though the original club appears to have had little impact on the way the game is played today, its characteristic style and tactics having been developed before the change in the offside law in 1925, some long-term influences are discernible in the continuing importance attached to sportsmanlike behaviour. While on tour in England but also in Europe, South Africa, the United States, Canada and Brazil, the Corinthians were effectively an advertisement for the patrician brand of soccer that they had offered in their late nineteenth-century heyday under ‘Pa’ Jackson. Overseas touring has been identified as one of the significant vectors through which soccer was …
Chris Bolsmann |‘Joy the Corinthians are coming!’The Corinthian Football Club on tour in Canada and the United States| Dilwyn Porter, Chris Bolsmann| 2018/4/19| | | | 111-126| Routledge| 102 ‘Joy the Corinthians are coming!’period too, and teams included the Carlton Cricket Club, the School of Medicine, the Toronto Lacrosse Club and University College. In 1876, these clubs founded the Toronto Football Association (TFA), renamed the Dominion Football Association (DFA) the following year. In 1878, the DFA introduced a Challenge Cup competition, only seven years after the Football Association (FA) Challenge Cup had been first played for in England. 6 At the same time, soccer was growing in the north-eastern industrial centres of the United States, primarily Kearny and Harrison in New Jersey, Fall River and New Bedford in Massachusetts and Pawtucket in Rhode Island. In 1884, the American Football Association (AFA), the first of its kind in the United States, was established in Newark and comprised teams from New Jersey, New York, Connecticut and Massachusetts. The AFA Cup was …
Chris Bolsmann |‘A scratch team with gentlemanly instincts’: The Corinthians and English soccer in the late nineteenth century| Dilwyn Porter, Chris Bolsmann| 2018/4/19| | | | 30-50| Routledge| ‘A scratch team with gentlemanly instincts’ 21 is then turned on to ‘Jackson’s Corinthians’, as they were sometimes known, and the practicalities of running a successful amateur club from the early 1880s through to the turn of the century. During his career, Jackson exhibited many of the qualities often attributed to entrepreneurs. He was an outsider, the son of a cheesemonger, who affected the gentility required to do business with the rich and famous; he was an opportunist who made connections between sports and sportsrelated activities to create new products; he was a publicist who recognized instinctively the value of a distinctive brand. Much of this was evident from the notice published in Football in October 1882, announcing the arrival of ‘A NEW ASSOCIATION CLUB’, open to ‘international and well-known players’, which would play on Wednesdays. Should anyone doubt the club’s credentials, there was …
Chris Bolsmann |Communing with continental amateurism: Corinthians in Europe, c. 1904–39| Dilwyn Porter, Chris Bolsmann| 2018/4/19| | | | 90-110| Routledge| Communing with continental amateurism 81 made their continental debut; they may have been early visitors, but they were not true pioneers. Second, responses to the Corinthians, especially before 1914, were determined partly by the predisposition of key sections of the urban bourgeoisie in Northern and Central Europe to look favourably on all things English. It helped, of course, that soccer was ‘a game of the elite’in the countries that the Corinthians visited. 2 Sports tourism could be an especially congenial experience when the hosts were attentive, flattering and shared a common social background with their guests. Third, the host-visitor relationship was characterized at first by deference in that the tourists were expected to demonstrate excellence, which continental sides could not hope to match. Over the years as the Corinthians declined and their European opponents improved, this became increasingly …
Chris Bolsmann |Decline and fall: The Corinthians in the twentieth century| Dilwyn Porter, Chris Bolsmann| 2018/4/19| | | | 51-71| Routledge| had worn ‘the coveted white shirt with the monogram “CFC” on the left breast’. They represented ‘the cream of amateur talent’and were especially praised for their ‘ever-increasing missionary work’, taking the game ‘into places where first-class contests were otherwise impossible’. 1 Such comments testified to the efforts of Jackson, assisted by a generally sympathetic sporting press, to create and market the Corinthian brand in the late nineteenth century. Moreover, when he withdrew from active involvement in the club’s affairs in 1898, the founder could be confident that his legacy was in safe hands. The secretary’s role passed first to GO Smith and WJ Oakley until 1902, then to BO Corbett until 1904 and then to SH Day until 1906. Thereafter, it was taken on by WU Timmis, who saw the club through English soccer’s ‘Great Split’and the disruption caused by the war. Each of these sporting gentlemen had played for …
Chris Bolsmann |‘They Are Fine Specimens of the Illustrious Indian Settler’: Sporting Contact between India and South Africa, 1914–1955| Chris Bolsmann, Goolam Vahed| 2017/11/2| Journal of Southern African Studies| 43| 6| 1273-1291| Routledge| Sporting contacts between the India and diasporic Indian community in South Africa were part of a broader range of links between the two countries. In this article, we consider association football tours between both countries from 1914 to 1955 against the backdrop of increased racism and segregation in South Africa and the anti-colonial movement in India. We draw from a range of sources, including archives, unpublished reports and newspaper articles. The sports tours helped to solidify relations between Indians in South Africa and India underpinning political, cultural, spiritual and emotional ties; they show how Indianness was forged among diasporans and that this was highly contested and constantly transformed in relation to external conditions; and they expose the racism on the part of white sporting organisations in particular and white politicians in general in South Africa.
Chris Bolsmann |A History of American Sports in 100 Objects by Cait Murphy| Chris Bolsmann| 2017| | 44| 3| 520-521| University of Illinois Press| The writing is workman-like, although sometimes a bit awkward in structure, and the organization is in short chapters with extensive footnotes after each chapter. At times, emulating the sports pages of the era, Martin’s writing is a bit hyperbolic, but overall, he provides a straight-forward story of an individual worthy of recognition. davies was a top scorer with his drives and two-handed set shot, but he was an even better passer and team leader. He began in a slow-down era but adjusted well to the fast-break ball that followed the inception of the twenty-four-second clock in the NBA in 1954–55; many opponents and coaches noted that this latter type of ball would have been perfect for davies to star. As it was, he was recognized as one of the early superstars of the early NBA (along with George Mikan and Joe Fulks), and his plaque in the Naismith Basketball Hall of Fame says as much. This is an easily read book with …
Chris Bolsmann |ENGLISH GENTLEMEN AND WORLD FOOTBALL: The Corinthians, C. 18801939| CHRIS. BOLSMANN| 2017| | | | | TAYLOR & FRANCIS| 
Chris Bolsmann |‘They are able to play football in South Africa’: Austria’s ‘little Wunderteam’on tour in 1936| Chris Bolsmann, Matthias Marschik| 2016/10/1| Sport in History| 36| 4| 439-458| Routledge| From the end of the nineteenth century South Africa had become a popular touring destination for British and colonial sports teams. Tours in the popular sport of cricket, football and rugby were very popular. These tours tested local opposition against foreign competition, brought in revenue to local and national sports associations and contributed to the development of a white South African identity. Austrian football teams were extensive travellers and popular attractions around the world. Prior to the Second World War Austrian football was highly regarded and was able to compete and hold its own against English and Scottish clubs and representative teams. This article considers an unusual tour by a combined Viennese football team to South Africa in 1936. We consider the preparations for the tour, the different playing styles and the way in which the visitors were received around the country. At the broader political …
Chris Bolsmann |FIFA (Fédération Internationale de Football Association): The Men, The Myths and the Money| Chris Bolsmann| 2016/7/2| | 36| 3| 411-413| Routledge| The Fédération Internationale de Football Association (FIFA) concluded its 65th congress against the backdrop of a number of arrests of high-ranking executive committee members and the re-election of Joseph S. Blatter as the president of the world sporting body. To the surprise of many, Blatter submitted his resignation as president of FIFA to an audience of 15 journalists less than a week later. In an important contribution to his existing scholarly work on FIFA, Alan Tomlin-
Chris Bolsmann |Connections, linkages and comparisons: African sports in transnational contexts.| Susann Baller, Chris Bolsmann| 2016| International Journal of the History of Sport| 33| 15| 1683-1883| Routledge| This special issue explores connections, linkages, and comparisons of African sports across a transnational context. A total of 11 articles address a range of issues, including: transnational partnerships in sport sport Subject Category: Activities
Chris Bolsmann |University rankings and the consolidation of elite networked institutions in an era of global capital| Sarah Amsler, Chris Bolsmann| 2015/9/12| | | | | | In this paper we explore the dual role of global university rankings in the creation of a new, knowledge-identified, transnational capitalist class and in facilitating new forms of social exclusion. We examine how and why the practice of ranking universities has become widely defined by national and international organisations as an important instrument of political and economic policy. We consider the development of university rankings into a global business combining social research, marketing and public relations, as a tangible policy tool that narrowly redefines the social purposes of higher education itself. Finally, it looks at how the influence of rankings on national funding for teaching and research constrains wider public debate about the meaning of ‘good’ and meaningful education in the United Kingdom and other national contexts, particularly by shifting the debate away from democratic publics upward into the elite networked institutions of global capital. We conclude by arguing that, rather than regarding world university rankings as a means to establish criteria of educational value, the practice may be understood as an exclusionary one that furthers the alignment of higher education with neoliberal rationalities at both national and global levels. exclusion; higher education; knowledge society; neoliberalism; transnational capitalist class; university rankings
Chris Bolsmann |Identity and Nation in African Football: Fans, Community, and Clubs| Chris Bolsmann| 2015/6/13| | 32| 9| 1218-1220| Routledge| One of the consequences of the FIFA World Cup held in South Africa in 2010 was the publication of a handful of popular and academic books that consider football on the African continent. 1 The increased focus on African football allows for new avenues of research activity and publications. Chuka Onwumechili and Gerard Akindes’ 2014 edited collection Identity and Nation in African Football: Fans, Community and Clubs adds to this growing body of work that focuses on African sport in general and football in particular. The authors are commended for embarking on an ambitious project that brings together a wide range of scholars from different disciplines primarily affiliated to African and North American institutions. In particular, the inclusion of graduate and postdoctoral researchers in the collection provides a welcome platform for newer scholars. The authors include historians, sociologists, literature, kinesiology …
Chris Bolsmann |Thoughts on the First African World Cup: Football, Representation and Exclusion| Chris Bolsmann| 2011/5/1| Journal des anthropologues. Association française des anthropologues| | 124-125| 359-371| Association française de anthropologues| This paper provides a brief reflection of the first African World Cup held in South Africa in June and July 2010. The author spent several weeks in the country attending matches and reflecting on his first World Cup as a sociologist and a football fan. He argues that despite the successful hosting of the World Cup, the event was marked by inclusion and exclusion.
Chris Bolsmann |South Africa, Pioneer of International Football| Chris Bolsmann| 2010| Afrique contemporaine| | 1| 25-33| De Boeck Supérieur| As the birthplace of African football, South Africa has contributed significantly to its internationalization. This paper interprets the way in which South African football was formalized and structured around the political and industrial networks of the British Empire during the Victorian era. At the end of the 19th century, five years even before FIFA was officially founded, African teams were the first to go overseas to play in Europe and South America. These tours were the first steps toward establishing football as a global sport.
Chris Bolsmann |L'Afrique du Sud, le précurseur du football international| Chris Bolsmann| 2010| Afrique contemporaine| | 1| 25-33| De Boeck Supérieur| RésuméBerceau du football en Afrique, l’Afrique du Sud a largement contribué à son internationalisation. L’article décrypte la formalisation et la structuration du football sud-africain autour de réseaux politiques et industriels de l’empire victorien. À la fin du XIXe siècle, cinq ans avant même la création officielle de la FIFA, les équipes africaines sont les toutes premières à traverser les mers pour jouer en Europe et en Amérique du Sud. Ces tournées constituent les prémices du football planétaire.
Chris Bolsmann |CONTRIBUTORS/CONTRIBUTEURS| Berhanu Abegaz, Gordon R Woodman, Tekalign Wolde-Mariam, Chris Bolsmann, Ernest-Marie Mbonda, Hassan Remaoun, Noël Obotela Rashidi, Aïcha Benamar, Ammara Bekkouche| 2007/3| Mars| | | | | AMMARA BEKKOUCHE est Maître de conférences, Université des sciences et de la technologie Mohamed Boudiaf, Oran, Algérie et Chercheure au Centre de recherche en anthropologie sociale et culturelle (CRASC), Oran. Parmi ses dernières publications: Compte rendu de lecture d’ouvrage: Services d’eau en Afrique subsaharienne La fragmentation urbaine en question par Sylvy Jaglin, Paris, CNRS Editions (Espaces & Milieux), 2005 (in Les annales de la recherche urbaine N 101, novembre 2006); Du village nègre colonial à Médina Jédida des Oranais, in Les annales de la recherche urbaine N 97, Octobre 2005.
AïCHA BENAMAR estDocteur en Didactique, Chercheure au CRASC. Parmi ses dernières publications:«Le préscolaire à l’heure de la réforme» in Dossier du ministère de la famille, www. ministre-famille. gov. dz/prescolaire. htm:«Le français au préscolaire en Algérie: entre nécessité et contingence», in Actes des premières journées scientifiques communes des réseaux de chercheurs concernant la langue, Ouagadougou, Burkina Faso, 30 mai-5 juin 2004; et «Le français au préscolaire en Algérie: entre nécessité et contingence», Journées Scientifiques Internationales des Chercheurs. Actualité scientifique «Éditions des archives contemporains», 2004.
Chris Bolsmann |La solidaridad y el internacionalismo sindical en la lucha contra el apartheid: el contacto sindical entre trabajadores y dirigentes en la industria automovilística| Chris Bolsmann, Yunersy Legorburo Ibarra| 2007/1/1| Estudios de Asia y África| | | 143-178| El Colegio de Mexico| El artículo muestra cómo tanto en Sudáfrica como en Alemania los intereses económicos, políticos e institucionales de sindicatos, trabajadores de base, comités de empresa, iglesias, grupos de apoyo e incluso la administración de una corporación trasnacional (CTN) fueron capaces de encontrar coincidencias y de confluir en favor del internacionalismo sindical y la solidaridad de los trabajadores durante la lucha contra el apartheid. En el ensayo, se muestra que hasta en el caso de la Sudáfrica del apartheid, los intereses políticos e institucionales de los participantes dominaron a menudo el ámbito del internacionalismo sindical y la solidaridad de los trabajadores, a pesar de la fuerte naturaleza política e ideológica de la lucha. Incluso en sus etapas de mayor éxito, las formas de solidaridad y de internacionalismo que documenta han estado marcadas por tensiones y obstáculos. Concluye así que la …
Chris Bolsmann |Place, Space and the New Labour Internationalisms| Chris Bolsmann| 2003/12/1| | 17| 4| 757-759| Sage Publications, Ltd.| Waterman and Wills' Place, Space and the New Labour Internationalisms, first pub lished as a special edition of Antipode 33 (3) 2001, seems to offer very diverse, and wide-ranging contributions from activists and academics. Upon closer scrutiny, the logic of the editors in incorporating such a varied input becomes clear, where they maintain (p. 5) that'we believe that the collection reflects the spirit of Seattle'. What unfolds in the 14 chapters is a very useful compilation that attempts to locate the role of labour within an era of globalization and, at the same time, branches out to other social actors within diverse contexts. In so doing, the book offers possible ways forward for labour, and simultaneously presents a useful critique of existing internationalism and highlights potential pitfalls for new endeavours. The book is valuable in two respects: firstly, a number of contributors attempt to address the issue of labour in the …
Chris Bolsmann |Labour internationalisms and globalisation| Chris Bolsmann| 2003/7/1| | 34| 2| 350-369| Taylor & Francis Group| This review article considers three books and three articles that acknowledge the detrimental effect of globalisation on labour. These works.accept that a revival of labour internationalism is occurring, and they attempt to map ways forward for the labour movement and trade unionism. Broad overlapping streams can be identified that attempt to locate the possibilities for labour in an era of globalisation. These include theorists who argue for global social movement unionism and its derivatives, those who position their analysis within international political economy, some who call for the restructuring of global governance, those who argue for new networks, and finally, those who call for the re-politicisation of the labour movement. Rather than arguing for one best way, the conclusions drawn from this review maintain that a multi-faceted approach, which continues to revive labour and strengthen its position and …
Chris Bolsmann |SOCIOLOGY OF WORK UNIT (SWOP)| Lucien van der Walt, Chris Bolsmann, Bernadette Johnson, Lindsey Martin| 2002/8| | | | | | The “transformation” of public sector universities in post-apartheid South Africa remains at the centre of government’s political commitments, policy formation processes, and public debate. 1 Yet one aspect of university restructuring has received surprisingly little attention: the trend towards the outsourcing of support services functions in the 1990s. Although the conflicts arising from this process caught the public eye on a number of occasions, most notably the controversy surrounding the restructuring of the support services at the University of the Witwatersrand in 2000, there has been no thorough study of the rise and effects of support services outsourcing in South Africa. The few studies that exist tend to be brief, sometimes journalistic, and generally confined to an examination of a single institution. By comparison, issues such as curriculum restructuring, university governance,“marketisation” and the proposed …
Chris Bolsmann |Book Review: We are the Poors: community struggles in post-apartheid South Africa| C Bolsmann| 2002| SOCIETY IN TRANSITION| 33| 3| 470-472| SOUTH AFRICAN SOCIOLOGICAL ASSOCIATION| 
Chris Bolsmann |The effects of support service outsourcing on workers and trade unions in public universities in SA| L van der Walt, C Bolsmann, B Johnson, L Martin| 2002| SOUTH AFRICAN LABOUR BULLETIN| 26| 4| 59-61| UMANYANO PUBLICATIONS| 
Chris Bolsmann |The South and the North federations of the ICFTU| C Bolsmann| 2001| SOUTH AFRICAN LABOUR BULLETIN| 25| 3| 82-86| UMANYANO PUBLICATIONS| 
Chris Bolsmann |So you want to merge? Lessons from recent mergers| C Bolsmann| 2001| SOUTH AFRICAN LABOUR BULLETIN| 25| 6| 61-66| UMANYANO PUBLICATIONS| 
Chris Bolsmann |Not quitepap and vleis' McDonald's in South Africa| C Bolsmann, E Vlok| 2001| SOUTH AFRICAN LABOUR BULLETIN| 25| 4| 61-66| UMANYANO PUBLICATIONS| 
Chris Bolsmann |La solidaridad y el internacionalismo sindical en la lucha contra el Apartheid| Chris Bolsmann, Yunersy Legorburo Ibarra| | | | | | El Colegio de México, Centro de Estudios de Asia y África| En este artículo se examinan la solidaridad y el internacionalismo sindical. Con mayor precisión, se trata de una investigación acerca de las relaciones que surgieron durante los años setenta entre trabajadores sudafricanos y alemanes y dirigentes sindicales de una compañía; a saber, Volkswagen. Por medio del análisis de las relaciones identificadas durante el apartheid, se estudia cómo se traslapan y convergen los intereses económicos, políticos e institucionales; al mismo tiempo, se reconocen los intereses de los protagonistas. Este artículo examina cómo esos intereses, a su vez, fueron capaces de influir en la solidaridad y el inter-nacionalismo sindical. Se consideran dos fases en la solidaridad y el internacionalismo. La primera analiza el surgimiento de vínculos laborales directos entre trabajadores sudafricanos y alemanes, por un lado, y dirigentes sindicales, por el otro, en la última parte de la década …
Chris Bolsmann |SOCIOLOGY OF WORK AND SOCIETY LY3012| Chris Bolsmann| | | | | | | There is no set textbook for this module. Rather a number of readings have been selected for each lecture and tutorial. These are indicated under Key Reading each week for the lecture and the tutorial. It is important that everyone reads the selected works prior to each lecture and tutorial. All the readings for the lectures are available from the short loan collection in the library. The readings for the tutorials are available in the library. Under Further Reading optional extra readings are suggested which students may find useful specifically for their essays.
Ovande Furtado Jr. |Influence of exercise intensity on the decision-making performance of experienced and inexperienced soccer players| Fabio E Fontana, Oldemar Mazzardo, Comfort Mokgothu, Ovande Furtado Jr, Jere D Gallagher| 2009/4| Journal of Sport and Exercise Psychology| 31| 2| 135-151| | The aim of this study was to examine the decision-making performance of experienced and inexperienced soccer players at four exercise intensities (rest, 40%, 60%, and 80% maximal aerobic power). The decision-making performance of inexperienced players was expected to demonstrate an inverted-U shape with increasing levels of exercise. For the experienced players, decision making was predicted to show no change in performance with increased exercise intensity. Thirty-two adult soccer players (16 experienced, 16 inexperienced) were asked to answer seven decision-making questions as quickly and accurately as possible for each exercise intensity. Results indicated that exercise does not affect the accuracy of decision making; however, the speed of decision making for experienced and inexperienced players improved with increased exercise intensity. These results suggest that physiologically …
Ovande Furtado Jr. |Anti-fat bias among physical education teachers and majors| Fabio Eduardo Fontana, Ovande Furtado, Ripley Marston, Oldemar Mazzardo, Jere Gallagher| 2013| Physical Educator| 70| 1| 15| Sagamore Publishing LLC| Obesity has reached epidemic levels, and physical education teachers are on the front lines to combat it. However, anti-fat bias from physical education teachers may be a barrier against the participation of students who are obese in physical activity. Thus, our purpose was to investigate the attitude of physical education teachers and majors toward obese individuals. Fortyseven physical education teachers and 149 majors participated in the study. Participants answered three questionnaires: Anti-Fat Attitude Scale (AFAS measures explicit attitudes toward obese individuals), Perception of Obese Students by Physical Education Teachers questionnaire (POSPET measures how teachers perceive students who are obese during class), and Implicit Association Test (IAT is a timed assessment measuring automatic attitudes toward obese individuals through word categorizations: good-bad, lazymotivated). Based on one …
Ovande Furtado Jr. |Whole and part practice: A meta-analysis| Fabio E Fontana, Oldemar Mazzardo, Ovande Furtado Jr, Jere D Gallagher| 2009/10| Perceptual and motor skills| 109| 2| 517-530| Ammons Scientific, Ltd.| Motor learning textbooks provide specific recommendations for the use of whole and part practice during motor skill acquisition. Magill recommended basing decisions on Naylor and Briggs' hypothesis of task complexity and organization, while Schmidt and Wrisberg recommended basing decisions on skill classification. To evaluate the accuracy of these recommendations, a meta-analysis was conducted. Through a literature search, 44 articles were located, and 20 provided sufficient information to calculate effect sizes. Effect sizes were calculated using means for whole and part practice for acquisition and retention. Although several analyses were compromised by insufficient studies investigating whole and part practice, mean effect sizes generally supported motor learning textbooks. To better verify the empirical validity of recommendations for the use of whole and part practice, more studies are necessary.
Ovande Furtado Jr. |Anti-fat bias by professors teaching physical education majors| Fabio Fontana, Ovande Furtado Jr, Oldemar Mazzardo Jr, Deockki Hong, Wagner de Campos| 2017/2| European Physical Education Review| 23| 1| 127-138| SAGE Publications| Anti-fat bias by professors in physical education departments may interfere with the training provided to pre-service teachers. The purpose of this study was to evaluate the attitudes of professors in physical education departments toward obese individuals. Professors from randomly selected institutions across all four US regions participated in the study (N = 94). Participants took the Implicit Association Test and answered the Anti-Fat Attitude Scale and two questions specifically designed to measure their attitudes toward physical education teachers and majors who are obese. The participants exhibited implicit good–bad (p < .001) and lazy–motivated (p < .001) anti-fat biases. Professors favored accepting majors who are obese (p < .001), but they strongly disapproved of obese physical education teachers as role models to their students (p < .001). Explicit anti-fat bias was associated with a stronger disapproval of …
Ovande Furtado Jr. |A influência do nível sócio-econômico e sexo na performance motora de crianças de 6 e 7 anos de idade| Wagner de CAMPOS, Ovande FURTADO JÚNIOR, Fábio Eduardo FONTANA| 1997| Synopsis. Curitiba| 8| | 21-28| | 
Ovande Furtado Jr. |The Reliability of Classification Decisions for the Furtado-Gallagher Computerized Observational Movement Pattern Assessment System - FG-COMPASS| Ovande Furtado Junior, Jere Gallagher| 2012| Research Quarterly for Exercise and Sport| 83| | 383-390| AAHPERD| Mastery of fundamental movement skills (FMS) is an important factor in preventing weight gain and increasing physical activity. To master FMS, performance evaluation is necessary. In this study, we investigated the reliability of a new observational assessment tool. In Phase I, 110 video clips of children performing five locomotor, and six manipulative FMSs were developed. In Phase II, rating scales were developed, and their efficacy was evaluated by comparing judgments of 30 undergraduate students to a standard. The mean weighted kappa (.71) was considered good (range .51–.85). Of the 11 rating scales, 6 were modified, and 5 remained unchanged. This study sets the foundation for the development of a new observational scale to assess fundamental movement skills.
Ovande Furtado Jr. |Relative age effect and academic timing in American junior college baseball| Thomas C Beals, Ovande Furtado Jr, Fabio E Fontana| 2018/2| Perceptual and motor skills| 125| 1| 147-161| SAGE Publications| Previous research has shown that older athletes within age groupings are often perceived to be more talented simply due to advanced maturity, leading to biased selection in higher levels of sports competition, now commonly termed relative age effect (RAE). This study’s goals were to determine whether (a) RAE influenced the selection of junior college baseball participants and (b) academic timing , in which academic status determines age groupings more than strict age guidelines for college sports, influenced the formation of RAE. Participants were 150 junior college baseball players. Our results showed that RAE was only a significant factor, comparing the birth distribution of participants born before and after the midpoint of the participation year, when academic timing was also a factor in determining age groupings. In addition, the birth rate distribution, though not significantly different than expected, was greater …
Ovande Furtado Jr. |Relationship between fundamental movement skills and body mass index in rural elementary age children| Mariah L Bolin| 2013| | | | | | A factor of how much physical activity a child gets could be determined by the level of mastery of fundamental movement skills that are needed for the establishment of skills used in many forms of adult physical activity. Children who master a number of fundamental movement skills are more likely to be physically active and they also may be more likely to take part in physical activity when being compared to peers with a lesser level of motor skill proficiency. Children who are considered overweight tend to engage less often in physical activities, which in turn may prevents them from acquiring fundamental movements skills. Therefore, the purpose of this study was to investigate the relationship between Body Mass Index (BMI) and fundamental movement skills in children ages 5 to 7 in a rural school system. The following two research questions were formulated: Does the performance of locomotor and manipulative …
Ovande Furtado Jr. |Furtado-Gallagher Movement Skill Assessment: Collecting evidence for content-related validity| Ovande Furtado| 2004/12/15| | | | | | The National Association for Sport and Physical Education (NASPE) emphasizes in its second edition of the National Standards for Physical Education the importance of linking instruction and assessment in physical education. NASPE standards reflect what students should know and be able to do as a result of a quality physical education (NASPE, 2004). This link is even more beneficial to students and teachers alike when assessment is aligned with the NASPE content standards. Therefore, the purpose of this study was to develop a criterion-referenced assessment tool to test movement concepts and fundamental movement skills of children ages 3 through 10 and provide evidence for content-related validity. An attempt was made to develop an assessment tool that is tied closely to the postulates of the National Standards for Physical Education (NASPE, 2004). The gathering of evidence for content-related validity was accomplished through judgments of a panel of 20 content experts (professors = 8; and PE teachers = 12). An Internet-based item review form was used to collect information from experts. Experts rated content at item level (31 items divided in 7 categories) using a four point likert-type scale where 1 being 'not important at all' and 4 'very important'. Content was also rated at test level (7 questions) addressing the match between the test content and the test general characteristics (e.g., match between the proposed set of items and the test purpose). This set of questions were rated on a five point likert-type scale with 1 being 'poor' and 5 being 'excellent'. Many of the expert reviewers also provided written feedback on the content of the …
Ovande Furtado Jr. |The relationship of movement skills with habitual and organized physical activity in seven and eight-year-old children| Oldemar Mazzardo, Fábio Eduardo Fontana, Ovande Furtado, Jere D Gallagher| 2018/3/29| Pensar a Prática| 21| 1| | | PURPOSE:
To verify the association of motor skills with habitual and organized PA participation, and sedentary behavior for males and females.
METHODS:
The study employed a cross-sectional design in a sample of seventy-six second graders from a public elementary school in a Midwestern State.
RESULTS:
Mann Whitney and t-tests indicated gender differences in FMS and PA variables. Spearman correlation analyses demonstrated that habitual PA was correlated to total FMS, and manipulative skills for boys. For girls, a significant association was present in organized PA and locomotor skills.
CONCLUSION:
Choice of organized physical activity seems to influence the development of FMS and affect habitual PA behavior differently in boys and girls.
Ovande Furtado Jr. |Investigating expert-rater agreement and inter/intra-rater reliability of two fundamental movement skills for the locomotor subscale of the FG-COMPASS| Lino Perez| 2018| | | | | | The Furtado-Gallagher Computerized Observational Movement Pattern Assessment System (FG-COMPASS) is an observational rating scale using sequential decisions to assess fundamental movement skills. The current version of the test has 3 locomotor and 5 manipulative skills. This study aimed to assess expert-rater agreement and inter/intra rater reliability of two new scales to be added to the locomotor subtest. This study was divided into two phases. In Phase I, 60 children between the ages of 5 and 10 were filmed performing the skills of galloping and vertical jumping. An expert in motor behavior classified the videotapes using the newly created rating scales. Next, 8 video clips were selected for training purposes and 24 video clips for testing purposes. In Phase II, 30 undergraduate and graduate students served as raters and underwent a training session prior the testing session. Participants were instructed not to classify the video clips based on the apparent age of the children as skill levels were distributed across all age levels. Further, to avoid guessing, participants were not told how many videos of each level they would be rating. Unlike the training sessions, participants did not receive feedback during testing sessions. Weighted kappa (Kw) and Intraclass Correlation Coefficient (ICC) were used to analyze data. Results suggested a “very good” agreement between expert and rater consensus for vertical jumping (Kw = .96) and galloping (Kw=.89) and an “excellent” agreement for vertical jump (ICC = .98) and galloping (ICC = .95). Inter-rater reliability resulted in “very good” agreement for vertical jumping (Kw=.92) and a “good …
Ovande Furtado Jr. |Expert-Rater Agreement and Inter-/Intrarater Reliability for the Furtado–Gallagher Computerized Observational Movement Pattern Assessment System| Ovande Furtado Jr, Jere D Gallagher| 2018| Perceptual and Motor Skills| 125| 3| 423-437| SAGE Publications| Fundamental movement skills (FMS) play a crucial role in a child’s motor skill development, as their mastery is related to the acquisition and mastery of specialized sport skills and to a child’s general health through the prevention of weight gain and increased level of physical activity. Thus, the accurate and reliable measurement of FMS is of related importance. This article presents the results of two studies intended to assess expert-rater agreement and inter-/intrarater scoring reliability in the administration of a new observational FMS instrument, the Furtado–Gallagher Computerized Observational Movement Pattern Assessment System (FG-COMPASS). In Study 1, we found that four of the six scales that underwent modifications in a previous study yielded acceptable expert agreement, permitting their retention in the revised test, while the two remaining scales measuring side sliding and leaping yielded insufficient …
Ovande Furtado Jr. |English to Portuguese reverse translation and initial evidence of rater-expert agreement for the FG-COMPASS| Ovande Furtado, Oldemar Mazzardo, Priscila L Watanabe, Wagner De Campos, Jere D Gallagher| 2017/6/1| | 39| | S65-S66| HUMAN KINETICS PUBL INC| 
Ovande Furtado Jr. |Perception of obese individuals by professors teaching PETE majors| Piroska Boros, Fabio E Fontana, Ovande Furtado Jr| 2014/6/1| | 36| | S82-S82| HUMAN KINETICS PUBL INC| 
Ovande Furtado Jr. |The Relationship Between Body Mass Index and Fundamental Movement Skills Performance in Rural Children| Mariah Bolin, Ovande Furtado| 2014/1/1| | 85| | 42-42| http://aahperd.confex.com/aahperd/2014/webprogram/Paper19472.html| Background/Purpose: Mastery of fundamental movement skills (FMS) is considered a crucial component in securing physical activity participation and, in turn, decreasing the likelihood of obesity. The purpose of this study was to investigate the relationship between body mass index (BMI) and FMS performance among children ages 5 to 7 years in a rural school system. Secondly, we intended to investigate gender differences in FMS performance.
Method: Participants were 39 kindergarteners and 1st graders (20 boys and 19 girls) in a K-8 public school located in Eastern Illinois. BMI was calculated for each participant using the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC) Web site calculator tool (CDC, 2008). FMS performance was assessed using the Furtado-Gallagher Computerized Observational Movement Pattern Assessment System (FG-COMPASS). Logical validity evidence (Furtado, 2004) and …
Ovande Furtado Jr. |Reliability of Classification Decisions for the FG-COMPASS: A Follow-up| Ovande Furtado, Jere Gallagher, Hasan Mavi| 2013/3/27| | 84| | A41-A41| ROUTLEDGE JOURNALS, TAYLOR & FRANCIS LTD| Method
: The accuracy of classification decisions for the six rating scales was evaluated by comparing judgments of 28 PE major students to a standard. Participants were tested 3 to 5 days after training to classify FMS performances by watching pre-recorded videos. The training tool was comprised of 3 videos per skill. During the testing session, participants classified 60 videos (10 per skill).
Ovande Furtado Jr. |Antifat Bias Among Physical Education Teachers and Majors| Fabio Fontana, Ovande Furtado, Ripley Marston, Trey Leech, Oldemar Mazzardo| 2012/3/1| | 83| | A43-A44| ROUTLEDGE JOURNALS, TAYLOR & FRANCIS LTD| Background/Purpose Anti-fat bias has been found in schooling, employment, and health care. Obesity has reached epidemic levels, and anti-fat bias from physical education teachers may be a barrier against the participation of obese students in physical activity. Thus, our purpose was to investigate the attitude of physical education teachers and majors towards obese individuals.
Method Forty-seven physical education teachers and 149 majors participated in the study. Teachers and majors answered two questionnaires: Implicit Association Test (IAT is a timed assessment measuring automatic attitudes towards obese individuals through word categorizations: good/bad, lazy/motivated), and Anti-Fat Attitude Scale (AFAS measures explicit attitudes towards obese individuals). Physical education teachers also answered the Perception of Obese Students by Physical Education Teachers questionnaire (POSPET measures how teachers perceive obese students during class).
Ovande Furtado Jr. |Measurement and Evaluation-The Reliability of Classification Decisions for the Furtado-Gallagher Computerized Observational Movement Pattern Assessment System—FC-COMPASS| Ovande Furtado Jr, Jere D Gallagher| 2012| Research Quarterly for Exercise and Sport| 83| 3| 383| | 
Ovande Furtado Jr. |The Relative Age Effect and Academic Timing in College Baseball| Thomas Beals, Jr. Furtado, Ovande.| 2012| | | | A32| Research Quarterly for Exercise and Sport| Background/Purpose
Previous research has suggested that older athletes within the same age grouping are often perceived to be more talented simply due to advanced maturity. This perception leads to biased selection and skewed participation rates favoring the oldest participants within the group. This resulting skewed distribution is termed Relative Age Effect (RAE). Further, academic institutions often group their participants according to their academic status, not strictly by age. This factor, termed Academic Timing, can result in the ages of competitors spanning more than a single calendar year. Therefore, our purpose was to investigate whether RAE influenced the selection of junior college baseball participants, and study whether Academic Timing influences the formation of RAE.
Ovande Furtado Jr. |Sleep Duration, Physical Activity, and Body Mass Index of Middle School Students| Scott M Ronspies, Matthew Madden, Ovande Furtado, Gannon White| 2011/3/1| | 82| 1| A62-A62| AMER ALLIANCE HEALTH PHYS EDUC REC & DANCE| 
Ovande Furtado Jr. |Do we know when to use whole and part practice? A meta-analysis| FE Fontana, O Mazzardo, O Furtado, J Gallagher| 2006/6/1| | 28| | S67-S68| HUMAN KINETICS PUBL INC| 
Ovande Furtado Jr. |The Association of Health Risk Behaviors, Anxiety and Depression Among Middle and High School Students in Southern Brazil| Oldemar Mazzardo, Ovande Furtado Jr, Adelar A Sampaio, Alan L Chapla, Luis Szczuk, Bryan S Jacob, Sabrina RW Gomes| | | | | | | METHODS
Table 1. Relative frequencies and Chi-square tests of mental health and health risk behaviors by sex and level of schooling
Andrew Linden |Disrupting dominant discourses:# HERESPROOF of interest in women's sports| Dunja Antunovic, Andrew D Linden| 2015/1/2| Feminist Media Studies| 15| 1| 157-159| Routledge| Feminist sport scholars have observed the underrepresentation and misrepresentation of women athletes and women’s sports in media with great concern (Cheryl Cooky, Michael A. Messner, and Robin Hextrum 2013). Scholars have attributed this drought to decision making: national surveys indicate that industry leaders in sports media operate under the assumption that their readers, viewers, and listeners are not interested in women’s sports (Marie Hardin 2005; Marie Hardin, Dunja Antunovic, Steve Bien-Aimé, and Roubing Li 2013). To challenge this assumption, in November 2013, the Tucker Center for Research on Girls & Women in Sport at the University of Minnesota launched a social media initiative titled the# HERESPROOF Project. The Tucker Center encourages Instagram, Twitter, and Facebook users to post photos from girls’ and women’s sporting events and to attach the “HERESPROOF Seal” to …
Andrew Linden |From Ladies' Days to Women's Initiatives: American Pastimes and Distaff Consumption| Jaime Schultz, Andrew D Linden| 2014/1/22| The International Journal of the History of Sport| 31| 1-2| 156-180| Routledge| American entrepreneurs have, for more than a century, sought to cultivate female consumers of national pastimes, specifically horse racing, boxing, baseball, football and basketball. Because these sports have been principally and historically associated with manliness and masculinity, it is more appropriate to think in terms of women's involvement and consumption, as opposed to their athletic participation when it comes to ‘pastime' status. Marketing campaigns aimed at women by the promoters of national pastimes reveal complex processes of commercialisation, bourgeoisification and hypercommodification. The ways in which major sports leagues and administrators appealed to women have long been based on essentialised feminine roles, treating women as moralising agents, wives and mothers, and consumers. These strategies represent the primary force in shaping women's inclusion in national pastimes. In …
Andrew Linden |Revolution on the American Gridiron: Gender, contested space, and women’s football in the 1970s| Andrew D Linden| 2015/12/12| The International Journal of the History of Sport| 32| 18| 2171-2189| Routledge| Scholarship on the 1970s ‘women’s movement’ in the USA has grown in recent years. However, this area has yet to fully incorporate women’s athletic experiences. This paper brings together these two areas of scholarship through analysis of women’s experiences playing professional football in 1970s America. Women athletes articulated little connection between football and the larger feminist campaign for corporeal autonomy and equality and some pronounced a distinctly antifeminist identity. My intent is not to force the feminist mantle on these women or to contest their self-descriptions. Rather, I seek to locate their experiences within the larger women’s movement using historian Anne Enke’s idea of ‘contested space’ (Finding the Movement, 2007). Drawing on interviews with 13 women on three different teams during the 1970s, I argue that while women football players did not explicitly align with the feminist …
Andrew Linden |Tempering the Dichotomous Flame: Social History, Cultural History, and Postmodernism(s) in the Journal of Sport History, 1974–2014| Andrew D Linden| 2016/4/1| Journal of Sport History| 43| 1| 66-82| University of Illinois Press| In the June 2014 issue of the Journal of American History, which includes a forum titled “State of the Field: Sports in American History,” Amy Bass argues that, as many humanities-based disciplines adopted tenets of cultural history, sport history did not. Based on over a decade of debate about social, cultural, and postmodernist paradigms, Bass's assertion illuminates continuing historiographical arguments about epistemology and theory in sport history. In this article, I respond to these discussions by analyzing 405 full-length articles in the Journal of Sport History from the first issue in 1974 through the end of 2014. Drawing on philosopher R. Scott Kretchmar's caution against “dualisms [and] dichotomies” in sport scholarship, I argue for a holistic understanding of sport history, rather than the dichotomous historiography present over the past decade.
Andrew Linden |Heat-Related Deaths in American Football: An Interdisciplinary Approach| Jaime Schultz, W Larry Kenney, Andrew D Linden| 2014/11| Sport History Review| 45| 2| 123-144| | As observers of American football turn their attention to the crises of concussions, subconcussive hits, chronic traumatic encephalopathy, and attendant issues related to direct contact and collision, it may be easy to lose track of the too frequent occurrence of what experts refer to as a type of “indirect” fatality caused by “systemic failure as a result of exertion”: those associated with heat. 1 Typically brought about by engaging in intense physical effort in hot and humid conditions, the vast majority of these deaths need not occur. Despite the growing scientific understanding of the problem, however, heat-related deaths persist, often surging at different points in history. It is not just an issue of science, then, but also an issue of culture and one that necessitates an interdisciplinary approach. Physicians have documented heat-related deaths in football since the early twentieth century, but it was the 2001 death of the …
Andrew Linden |Looking at Losing: Presentations of the Media's Narrative of the Cleveland Browns’ Relocation| Andrew D Linden| 2012/12/1| The International Journal of the History of Sport| 29| 18| 2575-2598| Taylor & Francis Group| On November 6, 1995, Art Modell announced his intention to relocate the National Football League's (NFL) Cleveland Browns to Baltimore following the season. After 4 months of civic activism from Cleveland's community and legal action from the city's politicians, Cleveland, the NFL and Modell agreed to a deal that allowed the long-time owner to honour his contract with Baltimore and simultaneously provided a NFL club to Cleveland to begin play in 1999. This settlement was unique because it allowed Cleveland to retain the naming rights, colours, logo and, most significantly, the history of the Browns. Media presentations of Modell's announcement during the 4-month period illuminated a complex symbiotic relationship between the press, the public and sports entrepreneurs. The local media castigated and vilified Modell for betraying Cleveland's community and disturbing the city's supposed ‘renaissance’, while …
Andrew Linden |Writing sport online: An analysis of the pitfalls and potential of academic blogging| Andrew D Linden, Lindsay Parks Pieper| 2017/7/1| Journal of Sport History| 44| 2| 257-274| University of Illinois Press| Opportunities abound for scholars' digital engagement. Among the numerous available technologies, blogging has emerged as a medium that presents both opportunities and challenges for academics. Although scholars have reflected on the values and drawbacks of blogging in academia, few have specifically analyzed academic sport blogs. This paper uses a content analysis of six sport-specific online forums to examine the composition of contributors and the content of posts, as well as the pitfalls and potential of academic sport blogging. Our analysis suggests that, while blogging offers novel opportunities for scholars, the forum simultaneously reifies problems already present in sport scholarship and academia.
Andrew Linden |Blue-Collar Identity and the" Culture of Losing": Cleveland and the" Save Our Browns" Campaign| Andrew D Linden| 2015/10/18| Journal of Sport History| 42| 3| 340-0360| University of Illinois Press| In November 1995, Cleveland football fans began the "Save Our Browns" campaign after owner Art Modell announced he would move the team to Baltimore after the season. By February 1996, the initiative influenced the National Football League's decision to allow Cleveland to keep the legacy of the Browns and offer the city a new team. Letters found at the Pro Football Hall of Fame show how the Save Our Browns campaign illuminated a "culture of losing"–the combination of a declining city, poor sports teams, and angst from social change–in the greater Cleveland community. I argue that Clevelanders' fight for the Browns represented their desire for a Cleveland of the past that included an idealized blue-collar identity consisting of expressions of heteronormative, white masculinity. These expressions show how some considered sports more important than other forms of social change in the Rust Belt city in the …
Andrew Linden |Political Football: Social Movements and the Professional Gridiron in the United States, 1955-1979| Andrew David Linden| 2016/8/26| | | | | | Politics and political movements appeared in professional football since the sport emerged. However, because the National Football League (NFL) was not yet popular across the country, these issues had little effect on the broader culture. In the second half of the century, the NFL became the most popular consumer sport in the country. Conflicts between labor and capital, between men and women, between races and ethnicities, and between groups associated with the broader counterculture and liberation movements were brought by political advocates into the sport. Nonetheless, throughout this same time, the league had political priorities of its own and endorsed certain political issues while not engaging others. In this dissertation, I utilize a “multiple histories” approach to analyze the effect of social movements on the NFL and demonstrate the influence of political football in American culture. To do so, I examine how four social movements (Civil Rights, the New Left and counterculture, labor, and the women’s movement) intersected with professional football from the late 1950s through the 1970s. League representatives had varying reactions each time a social movement appeared on the gridiron. For example, some team owners and coaches supported black athletes fighting to desegregate the game and other areas of society through non-violent protest, but they reacted to the broader Civil Rights Movement by reaffirming notions of white supremacy. While league marketers promoted athletes who endorsed the Vietnam War and other “patriotic” efforts to defeat communism, they avoided engaging with critics (particularly if they were players …
Andrew Linden |Sport History in the Digital Era| Andrew D Linden| 2016/1/1| | 47| 1| 119-120| HUMAN KINETICS PUBL INC| 
Andrew Linden |LT: The Life & Times dir. by Peter Radovich| Andrew D Linden| 2015| | 42| 2| 230-231| University of Illinois Press| In an era when controversy continuously casts a negative shadow over the National Football League, memories of past American football greats historicize a league that has grappled with athletes’ personal troubles and larger social issues. In LT: The Life & Times, Showtime Sports presents a narrative of one of the sport’s legends, who, like many players today, faced troubles off the gridiron. As former New York Giants linebacker Lawrence Taylor—colloquially known as “LT”—states at the beginning of the nearly two-hour documentary,“As easy as football is to me... is as hard as life is to me.” Indeed, LT was a dynamic gridiron star. After his playing college football at the University of North Carolina, the New York Giants drafted LT with the second overall pick in the 1981 NFL draft. He immediately impacted the team, winning both the Defensive Rookie of the Year and overall Defensive Player of the Year awards in his …
Andrew Linden |Getting Physical: The Rise of Fitness Culture in America by Shelly McKenzie| Andrew D Linden, Adam Berg| 2015| | 42| 1| 138-139| University of Illinois Press| 138 Volume 42, Number 1 daily at the gymnasium. At age thirty-four he suffered a dislocated collarbone while wrestling. After the gymnasium trainers tried and failed, Galen properly diagnosed himself, treated himself for forty days and fully recovered. He also writes about a youthful wrestler injured by a blow to the sternum. When others could not help him, an abscess formed and the youth might have died, but Galen excised the diseased sternum and the youth survived.
News of Galen’s expertise reached Emperor Marcus Aurelius, who appointed Galen personal physician to his heir Commodus. Galen also received an imperial salary for preparing Aurelius’ daily potion of theriac (a mixture of over sixty ingredients from viper flesh to opium), which supposedly helped the emperor sleep. Despite losing many of his writings in a fire in 192, Galen continued to write and treat patients well into his old age. Readers …
Andrew Linden |A Brief Taxonomy of Sports that Were Not Quite American National Pastimes: Fads and Flashes-in-the-Pan, Nationwide and Regional Pastimes, the Pastimes of Other Nations, and Pan …| Jaime Schultz, Dunja Antunovic, Adam Berg, Justine Kaempfer, Andrew D Linden, Thomas Rorke, Colleen English, Mark Dyreson| 2014/1/22| The International Journal of the History of Sport| 31| 1-2| 250-272| Routledge| Several sports have served as American national pastimes over the course of the nation's history. Horse racing, hunting, prize fighting, baseball, football, and basketball have waxed and waned in a long series of debates over what constitutes ‘true' national pastimes. Unlike some nations that have declared national pastimes by governmental fiat, US national games emerge from organic and sometimes chaotic cultural processes. An alternative history of sports that have become popular and widespread national habits but have not quite become national pastimes sheds important light on what national pastimes are and how they have developed in American history. A variety of pretenders to the title of national pastime have come and gone. These challengers can be categorised as fads and flashes-in-the-pan, nationwide and regional pastimes, the pastimes of other nations, and pan-national pastimes. An …
Andrew Linden |Sportista: female fandom in the United States| Andrew D Linden| 2013/10/8| | 16| 9| 1213-1216| Routledge| Andrei S. Markovits and Emily K. Albertson’s Sportista: Female Fandom in the United States analyzes the often stereotyped female fan of big-time sports in the USA. Markovits has produced a considerable amount of scholarship on comparative sport culture in both the USA and Europe. Albertson, an undergraduate at the University of Michigan at the time of writing, clearly identifies herself as one of the female fans studied in Sportista. Together the two authors examine ‘the woman who not only loves her sports but also knows them’and who ‘distinguishes herself from most of her world by being immensely passionate and knowledgeable about sports’(p. 5). Coining the term ‘sportista’–from the feminine term ‘fashionista’–Markovits and Albertson argue that women have crafted a distinctive identity as fans of ‘the hegemonic sports cultures’ in the USA (p. 5). While sportistas know a plethora of sporting information, the …
Andrew Linden |Money Games: Profiting from the Convergence of Sports and Entertainment by David M Carter| Andrew D Linden| 2013| | 40| 2| 334-335| University of Illinois Press| The business of sports and entertainment rapidly expanded in the last half of the twentieth century. According to David M. Carter, the convergence of sports and entertainment “has been relatively contained” and primarily occurred “in and around sports venues”(p. 1). Today, this convergence is “borderless” and “pervasive,” and it “continues to create business challenges while simultaneously providing significant opportunities for those hoping to make money from it”(p. 1). In essence, Carter claims that sports have become synonymous with entertainment. For example, his analysis of the burgeoning “poker boom”(p. 150) astutely reifies the notion that there is a hazy demarcation point between sports and entertainment. Carter thus focuses on stakeholders, who have monetized the convergence, and offers recommendations for future entrepreneurs about ways in which to profit from the burgeoning industry.
Carter …
Andrew Linden |The Cultural Nexus of Sport and Business: The Relocation of the Cleveland Browns| Andrew D Linden| 2012| | | | | | On November 6, 1995, Arthur Modell announced his intention to transfer the Cleveland Browns to Baltimore after the conclusion of the season. Throughout the ensuing four months, the cities of Cleveland and Baltimore, along with Modell, National Football League (NFL) officials and politicians, battled over the future of the franchise. After legal and social conflicts, the NFL and Cleveland civic officials agreed on a deal that allowed Modell to honor his contract with Baltimore and simultaneously provided an NFL team to Cleveland to begin play in 1999. This settlement was unique because it allowed Cleveland to retain the naming rights, colors, logo, and, most significantly, the history of the Browns.
Andrew Linden |Month: September 2014| Brett Abrams, Cathryn Lucas-Carr, Moorea Coker, Hunter Hampton, Harold Hubbard, Jorge Iber, Ramon Jackson, Andrew D Linden, Andrew McGregor, Adam Park, Lindsay Parks Pieper, Max Rieger, Dain TePoel, Stephen Townsend| | | | | | | On Saturday, November 23, 1963, Oklahoma and Nebraska were schedule to meet in Lincoln. It was an important game in the Big 8 standings. The Sooners were 7-1 going into the game, 5-0 in conference play. Their only loss that season was to Darrell Royal and a pesky Texas team that seemed to always have Oklahoma’s number.
Nebraska had a good team. They were 8-1 and undefeated heading into their last conference game. Their only loss came against a tough Air Force team. The matchup between the Sooners and Cornhuskers would decide the conference championship.
Andrew Linden |Sport in American History| Brett Abrams, Cathryn Lucas-Carr, Moorea Coker, Hunter Hampton, Harold Hubbard, Jorge Iber, Ramon Jackson, Andrew D Linden, Andrew McGregor, Adam Park, Lindsay Parks Pieper, Max Rieger, Dain TePoel, Stephen Townsend| | | | | | | Last week, Nike introduced a new commercial. Featuring National Basketball Association superstar LeBron James,“Together” shows the Cleveland community rallying around its local hero. In grand and gallant fashion, James returned to the city on the shores of Lake Erie to reclaim his rightful place on the throne of his Rust Belt kingdom. The black and white, artistic production begins with James gathering his faithful patrons—the other basketball players that make up the Cleveland Cavaliers—around him in a pre-game huddle.“It’s our city, we gotta do it for them. We gotta do it for Cleveland, they’re waiting on us,” the two-time NBA MVP demands of his comrades. Soon, the crowd, and seemingly all of Cleveland, surround the self-proclaimed “kid from Akron”(a city~ 40 miles south of Cleveland).
Paulo Marchetti |Age-related changes in human postural control of prolonged standing| Sandra MSF Freitas, Silvana A Wieczorek, Paulo H Marchetti, Marcos Duarte| 2005/12/1| Gait & posture| 22| 4| 322-330| Elsevier| The aim of this study was to characterize prolonged standing and its effect on postural control in elderly individuals in comparison to adults. It is unknown how elderly individuals behave during prolonged standing and how demanding such a task is for them. We recorded the center of pressure (COP) position of 14 elderly subjects and 14 adults while they performed prolonged standing (30 min) and quiet stance tasks (60 s) on a force plate. The number and amplitude of the COP patterns, the root mean square (RMS), speed, and frequency of the COP sway were analyzed. The elderly subjects were able to stand for prolonged periods but they produced postural changes of lesser amplitude and a decreased sway during the prolonged standing task. Both the adults and the elderly subjects were influenced by the prolonged standing task, as demonstrated by their increased COP RMS and COP speed in the quiet …
Paulo Marchetti |Manual de musculação: uma abordagem teórico-prática do treinamento de força| Marco Carlos Uchida, Mario Augusto Charro, Reury Frank P Bacurau| 2009/12/14| | | | | Phorte Editora LTDA| A necessidade de bibliografias mais amplas e completas fez surgir este Manual de Musculação. Com base em uma nova perspectiva, este livro busca apresentar e ampliar, tanto ao praticante iniciante quanto ao avançado ou ao fisiculturista, os temas mais comuns sobre musculação, além de esclarecer que um treinamento bem estruturado, baseado em nutrição adequada, análise cardiovascular e programas de treino, pode trazer benefícios para a forma física.
Paulo Marchetti |Prescrição e periodização do treinamento de força em academias| Jonato Prestes, Denis Foschini, Paulo Marchetti, MA Charro, R Tibana| 2010| São Paulo, Phorte| | | | | Prescrição e Periodização do Treinamento de Força em Academias aborda conceitos fundamentais sobre a prescrição, a montagem de programas e os modelos de periodização do treinamento de força aplicados em academias. Oferece aos profissionais de Educação Física embasamento teórico para prescrever e periodizar programas de treinamento de força que proporcionem maiores benefícios e excelentes resultados a seus clientes. Por meio de modelos e metodologias elaborados a partir de uma criteriosa revisão da literatura especializada, a obra dispo-
Paulo Marchetti |Does the timing of measurement alter session-RPE in boxers?| Marco C Uchida, Luis FM Teixeira, Vladmir J Godoi, Paulo H Marchetti, Marcelo Conte, Aaron J Coutts, Reury FP Bacurau| 2014/1| Journal of sports science & medicine| 13| 1| 59| Dept. of Sports Medicine, Medical Faculty of Uludag University| The purpose of this study was to compare the influence of measuring the overall session rating of perceived exertion (session-RPE) at 10 vs. 30 minutes following exercise. Eight boxers completed three different standardized training sessions of different intensities (easy, moderate and hard) in a matchedpairs, randomized research design. Exercise intensity was assessed during each bout by measuring heart rate, blood lactate concentration and session-RPE. To assess the effect of measurement timing on session-RPE, RPE data were collected either 10 or 30 minutes post-exercise. There was no significant effect of measurement time on session-RPE values following easy (10 minutes: session-RPE= 1.3±1.0 Arbitrary Unit (AU),% Heart Rate Reserve (HRR)= 49.5±11.1, and∆ Blood lactate=-2.3±16.3%; 30 minutes: session-RPE= 1.7±1.0 AU,% HRR= 51.3±10.8, and∆ Blood lactate= 0.7±25.2%), moderate (10 …
Paulo Marchetti |Instrumentação em eletromiografia| Paulo Henrique Marchetti, Marcos Duarte| 2006| Laboratório de Biofísica, Escola de Educação Física e Esporte. São Paulo: Universidade de São Paulo| | | | | A eletromiografia é uma ferramenta importante na análise clínica da marcha e bastante utilizada para revelar informações relacionadas ao estado de ativação do músculo
Este capítulo tem como objetivo revisar conceitos relevantes à instrumentação e utilização da eletromiografia como ferramenta para a análise da marcha. De forma didática, o dividimos em duas sessões distintas: aquisição do sinal eletromiográfico e análise do sinal eletromiográfico. Introduzimos ainda, sessões informativas a respeito da padronização sobre instrumentação, tipos de eletromiógrafos e sites de pesquisa.
Paulo Marchetti |The Acute Effects of Unilateral Ankle Plantar Flexors Static- Stretching on Postural Sway and Gastrocnemius Muscle Activity During Single-Leg Balance Tasks| Bráulio N Lima, Paulo RG Lucareli, Willy A Gomes, Josinaldo J Silva, Andre S Bley, Erin H Hartigan, Paulo H Marchetti| 2014| Journal of Sports Science and Medicine| 13| | 564-570| | The aim of this study was to investigate the acute effects of unilateral ankle plantar flexors static-stretching on surface electromyography (sEMG) and the center of pressure (COP) during a single-leg balance task in both lower limbs. Fourteen young healthy, non-athletic individuals performed unipodal quiet standing for 30s before and after (stretched limb: immediately post-stretch, 10 and 20 minutes and non-stretched limb: immediately post-stretch) a unilateral ankle plantar flexor static-stretching protocol [6 sets of 45s/15s, 70-90% point of discomfort (POD)]. Postural sway was described using the COP area, COP speed (antero-posterior and medio-lateral directions) and COP frequency (antero-posterior and medio-lateral directions). Surface EMG (EMG integral [IEMG] and Median frequency [FM]) was used to describe the muscular activity of gastrocnemius lateralis. Ankle dorsiflexion passive range of motion …
Paulo Marchetti |Effects of instability versus traditional resistance training on strength, power and velocity in untrained men| José Luis Maté-Muñoz, Antonio J Antón Monroy, Pablo Jodra Jiménez, Manuel V Garnacho-Castaño| 2014/9| Journal of sports science & medicine| 13| 3| 460| Dept. of Sports Medicine, Medical Faculty of Uludag University| The purpose of this study was compare the effects of a traditional and an instability resistance circuit training program on upper and lower limb strength, power, movement velocity and jumping ability. Thirty-six healthy untrained men were assigned to two experimental groups and a control group. Subjects in the experimental groups performed a resistance circuit training program consisting of traditional exercises (TRT, n= 10) or exercises executed in conditions of instability (using BOSU® and TRX®)(IRT, n= 12). Both programs involved three days per week of training for a total of seven weeks. The following variables were determined before and after training: maximal strength (1RM), average (AV) and peak velocity (PV), average (AP) and peak power (PP), all during bench press (BP) and back squat (BS) exercises, along with squat jump (SJ) height and counter movement jump (CMJ) height. All variables were …
Paulo Marchetti |Acute bouts of upper and lower body static and dynamics stretching increase non‑local joint range of motion| David George Behm, Tyler Cavanaugh, Patrick Quigley, Jonathan Christopher Reid, Priscyla Silva Monteiro Nardi, Paulo Henrique. Marchetti| 2016| European Journal of Applied Physiology| 116| 1| 241-249| | Purpose
There are conflicts in the literature concerning the crossover or non-local effects of stretching. The objective of this study was to evaluate whether static (SS) and dynamic (DS) stretching of the shoulders would affect hip flexor range of motion (ROM) and performance and reciprocally whether SS and DS of the lower body would affect shoulder extension ROM and performance.
Methods
A randomized crossover study design examined the acute effects of upper and lower body SS and DS on lower and upper body performance measures, respectively. Experimental sessions included upper and lower body control tests, upper body (shoulder horizontal abduction) SS and lower body (hip abduction) SS, upper body (shoulder horizontal abduction and adduction) DS and lower body DS (hip abduction and adduction). Passive static and dynamic ROM …
Paulo Marchetti |Acute effects of light emitting diodes therapy (LEDT) in muscle function during isometric exercise in patients with chronic obstructive pulmonary disease: preliminary results …| Eduardo Foschini Miranda, Ernesto Cesar Pinto Leal-Junior, Paulo Henrique Marchetti, Simone Dal Corso| 2014/1/1| Lasers in medical science| 29| 1| 359-365| Springer London| Patients with chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD) are susceptible to early muscle fatigue. Light-emitting diodes therapy (LEDT) has been used to minimize muscle fatigue in athletes and healthy subjects. The aim of this study is to investigate the acute effects of LEDT on muscle fatigue and perception of effort in patients with COPD during isometric endurance test of the quadriceps femoris (QF). Ten patients (VEF1 50 ± 13 % of predicted) underwent a single LEDT and sham application, 48 h apart, in a randomized crossover design. The LEDT and sham were applied in three localized areas of the QF (rectus femoris, vastus lateralis, and vastus medialis). Before and after exposure to LEDT and sham, the patients performed an isometric endurance test (60 % of the maximum voluntary isometric contraction), until the limit of tolerance concomitant to surface electromyography recording (median …
Paulo Marchetti |Biomecânica Aplicada: Uma abordagem para o treinamento de força| Paulo Marchetti, Ruy Calheiros, Mario Charro| 2007| | | | | Phorte| 
Paulo Marchetti |Exercício supino: Uma breve revisão sobre os aspectos biomecânicos bench press exercise: A brief review in the biomechanical aspects| Paulo Henrique Marchetti, Claudinei Campos Arruda, Luiz Fernando Segamarchi, Enrico Gori, Daniel Takeshi Ito Soares, Danilo Atanázio da Luz Junior, Osvaldo Pelozo Jr, Marco Carlos| 2010| Brazilian journal of sports and exercise research| 1| 2| 135-142| | Atualmente o treinamento de força vem sendo muito utilizado em diferentes contextos e para diversos objetivos: atléticos, recreacionais, estéticos e terapêuticos. Indubitavelmente, um dos exercícios mais utilizados no treinamento de força, visando o desenvolvimento da musculatura superior do tronco é o supino. O entendimento das diversas variações do exercício supino pode influenciar na correta prescrição durante o treinamento de força. Diversos são os fatores biomecânicos que podem seletivizar atividades musculares e/ou a efetividade do programa de treino. O presente trabalho teve como objetivo revisar diversos aspectos anatômicos, cinesiológicos e biomecânicos do exercício supino, além de suas possíveis variações como as inclinações do banco, o afastamento da empunhadura, a amplitude de movimento, as diferenças entre o exercício supino guiado e não guiado e as diferenças entre o supino em base estável e instável. Conclue-‐se que com as diversas alterações mecânicas podem acarretar mudanças na ação dos músculos envolvidos no supino, aumentando ou diminuindo a performance e/ou sua eficiência. Palavras-‐Chave: treinamento de força, cinesiologia, supino.
Paulo Marchetti |Propulsion phase of the single leg triple hop test in women with patellofemoral pain syndrome: a biomechanical study| Andre Serra Bley, Joao Carlos Ferrari Correa, Amir Curcio Dos Reis, Nayra Deise Dos Anjos Rabelo, Paulo Henrique Marchetti, Paulo Roberto Garcia Lucareli| 2014/5/15| PloS one| 9| 5| e97606| Public Library of Science| Asymmetry in the alignment of the lower limbs during weight-bearing activities is associated with patellofemoral pain syndrome (PFPS), caused by an increase in patellofemoral (PF) joint stress. High neuromuscular demands are placed on the lower limb during the propulsion phase of the single leg triple hop test (SLTHT), which may influence biomechanical behavior. The aim of the present cross-sectional study was to compare kinematic, kinetic and muscle activity in the trunk and lower limb during propulsion in the SLTHT using women with PFPS and pain free controls. The following measurements were made using 20 women with PFPS and 20 controls during propulsion in the SLTHT: kinematics of the trunk, pelvis, hip, and knee; kinetics of the hip, knee and ankle; and muscle activation of the gluteus maximus (GM), gluteus medius (GMed), biceps femoris (BF) and vastus lateralis (VL). Differences between groups were calculated using three separate sets of multivariate analysis of variance for kinematics, kinetics, and electromyographic data. Women with PFPS exhibited ipsilateral trunk lean; greater trunk flexion; greater contralateral pelvic drop; greater hip adduction and internal rotation; greater ankle pronation; greater internal hip abductor and ankle supinator moments; lower internal hip, knee and ankle extensor moments; and greater GM, GMed, BL, and VL muscle activity. The results of the present study are related to abnormal movement patterns in women with PFPS. We speculated that these findings constitute strategies to control a deficient dynamic alignment of the trunk and lower limb and to avoid PF pain. However, the greater BF …
Paulo Marchetti |Upper Limb Static-Stretching Protocol Decreases Maximal Concentric Jump Performance.| Paulo Henrique Marchetti, Fernando H. D. de Oliveira Silva, Enrico G. Soares, Érica P. Serpa, Priscyla S. M. Nardi, Guanis de B. Vilela, David G. Behm| 2014| Journal of Sports Science and Medicine| 13| | 945-950| | The purpose of the present study was to evaluate the acute effects of an upper limb static-stretching (SS) protocol on the maximal concentric jump performance. We recruited 25 young healthy, male, resistance trained individuals (stretched group, n= 15 and control group, n= 10) in this study. The randomized between group experimental protocol consisted of a three trials of maximal concentric jump task, before and after a SS of the upper limb. Vertical ground reaction forces (vGRF) and surface electromyography (sEMG) of both gastrocnemius lateralis (GL) and vastus lateralis (VL) were acquired. An extensive SS was employed consisting of ten stretches of 30 seconds, with 15 seconds of rest, and 70-90% of the point of discomfort (POD). ANOVA (2x2)(group x condition) was used for shoulder joint range of motion (ROM), vGRF and sEMG. A significant interaction for passive ROM of the shoulder joint revealed …
Paulo Marchetti |Effects of the pullover exercise on the pectoralis major and latissimus dorsi muscles as evaluated by EMG| Paulo H Marchetti, Marco C Uchida| 2011/11| Journal of applied biomechanics| 27| 4| 380-384| | The aim of the current study was to investigate the EMG activity of pectoralis major and latissimus dorsi muscles during the pullover exercise. Eight healthy male volunteers took part in the study. The EMG activity of the pectoralis major and that of the latissimus dorsi of the right side were acquired simultaneously during the pullover exercise with a free-weight barbell during both the concentric and eccentric phases of the movement. After a warm-up, all the subjects were asked to perform the pullover exercise against an external load of 30% of their body weight, during 1 set × 10 repetitions. The criterion adopted to normalize the EMG data was the maximal voluntary isometric activation. The present findings demonstrated that the barbell pullover exercise emphasized the muscle action of the pectoralis major more than that of the latissimus dorsi, and the higher activation depended on the external force lever arm …
Paulo Marchetti |Unilateral Plantar Flexors Static-Stretching Effects on Ipsilateral and Contralateral Jump Measures| Josinaldo Jarbas da Silva, David George Behm, Willy Andrade Gomes, Fernando Henrique Domingues de Oliveira Silva, Enrico Gori Soares, Érica Paes Serpa, Guanis de Barros Vilela Junior, Charles Ricardo Lopes, Paulo Henrique Marchetti| 2015| Journal of Sports Science and Medicine| 14| 1| 315-321| | The aim of this study was to evaluate the acute effects of unilateral ankle plantar flexors static-stretching (SS) on the passive range of movement (ROM) of the stretched limb, surface electromyography (sEMG) and single-leg bounce drop jump (SBDJ) performance measures of the ipsilateral stretched and contralateral non-stretched lower limbs. Seventeen young men (24±5 years) performed SBDJ before and after (stretched limb: immediately post-stretch, 10 and 20 minutes and non-stretched limb: immediately post-stretch) unilateral ankle plantar flexor SS (6 sets of 45s/15s, 70-90% point of discomfort). SBDJ performance measures included jump height, impulse, time to reach peak force, contact time as well as the sEMG integral (IEMG) and pre-activation (IEMG pre-activation) of the gastrocnemius lateralis. Ankle dorsiflexion passive ROM increased in the stretched limb after the SS (pre-test: 21±4 and post-test: 26.5 …
Paulo Marchetti |Comparison between Pre-Exhaustion and Traditional Exercise Order on Muscle Activation and Performance in Trained Men| E.G. SOARES, L.E. BROWN, W.A. GOMES, D.A. CORRÊA, E.P. SERPA, J.J. SILVA, G.B. VILELA JUNIOR, G.Z. FIORAVANTI, M.S. AOKI, C.R. LOPES, P.H. MARCHETTI| 2016| Journal of Sports Science and Medicine| 15| 1| 111-117| | The purpose of this study was to measure the acute effects of pre-exhaustion vs. traditional exercise order on neuromuscular performance and sEMG in trained men. Fourteen young, healthy, resistance trained men (age: 25.5±4.0 years, height: 174.9±4.1 cm, and total body mass: 80.0±11.1 kg) took part of this study. All tests were randomized and counterbalanced for all subjects and experimental conditions. Volunteers attended one session in the laboratory. First, they performed ten repetition maximum (10RM) tests for each exercise (bench press and triceps pushdown) separately. Secondly, they performed all three conditions at 10RM: pre-test (bench press and triceps pushdown, separately), pre-exhaustion (triceps pushdown+ bench press, PE) and traditional (bench press+ triceps pushdown, TR), and rested 30 minutes between conditions. Results showed that pre-test was significantly greater than PE (p= 0.031 …
Paulo Marchetti |Upper and lower limb muscles in patients with COPD: similarities in muscle efficiency but differences in fatigue resistance| Eduardo Foschini Miranda, Carla Malaguti, Paulo Henrique Marchetti, Simone Dal Corso| 2014/1/1| Respiratory care| 59| 1| 62-69| Respiratory Care| BACKGROUND:
Peripheral muscle dysfunction is a common finding in patients with COPD; however, the structural adaptation and functional impairment of the upper and lower limb muscles do not seem to be homogenous. We compared muscle fatigue and recovery time between 2 representative muscles: the middle deltoid and the quadriceps femoris.
METHODS:
Twenty-one subjects with COPD (FEV1 46.1 ± 10.3% of predicted) underwent maximal voluntary isometric contraction and an endurance test (60% of maximal voluntary isometric contraction, to the limit of tolerance). The maximal voluntary isometric contraction test was repeated after 10 min, 30 min, 60 min, and 24 hours for both the quadriceps femoris and middle deltoid. Surface electromyography was recorded throughout the endurance test.
RESULTS:
Maximal voluntary isometric contraction significantly decreased only for the middle deltoid between …
Paulo Marchetti |Kinematic and sEMG analysis of the back squat at different intensities with and without knee wraps.| Willy Andrade Gomes, Lee E Brown, Enrico Gori Soares, Josinaldo Jarbas da Silva, Fernando Henrique Domingues de Oliveira Silva, Érica Paes Serpa, Daniel Alves Corrêa, Guanis de Barros Vilela Junior, Charles Ricardo Lopes, Paulo Henrique Marchetti| 2015/3/23| Journal of Strength and Conditioning Research| 29| 9| 2482–2487| | Gomes, WA, Brown, LE, Soares, EG, da Silva, JJ, Silva, FHDdO, Serpa, EP, Corrêa, DA, Vilela Junior, GdB, Lopes, CR, and Marchetti, PH. Kinematic and sEMG analysis of the back squat at different intensities with and without knee wraps. J Strength Cond Res 29 (9): 2482–2487, 2015—The purposes of this study were to measure the acute effects of knee wraps (KWs) on knee and hip joint kinematics, dynamic muscle activation from the vastus lateralis (VL) and gluteus maximus (GM), and rating of perceived exertion (RPE) during the back squat exercise at 2 different intensities. Fourteen resistance-trained men (age: 24 6 4 years, height: 176 6 6 cm, body mass: 81 6 11 kg, back squat 1 repetition maximum [1RM]: 107 6 30 kg, 3 6 1 year of back squat experience) performed 1 set of 3 repetitions under 4 different conditions, to a depth of approximately 90 degrees of knee joint flexion, and in random order: KWs at 60 …
Paulo Marchetti |Muscle strength, postural balance, and cognition are associated with braking time during driving in older adults| Angelica C Alonso, Mark D Peterson, Alexandre L Busse, Wilson Jacob-Filho, Mauricio TA Borges, Marcos M Serra, Natalia MS Luna, Paulo H Marchetti, Júlia MDA Greve| 2016/12/1| Experimental gerontology| 85| | 13-17| Pergamon| Background
Despite the well-known declines in driving performance with advancing age, there is little understanding of the specific factors that predict changes in key determinants such as braking time.
Objectives
The aims of this study were to determine the extent to which age, muscle strength, cognition and postural balance are associated with braking performance in middle-aged and older adults.
Methods
Male and female middle-aged adults (n = 62, age = 39.3 ± 7.1 years) and older adults (n = 102, age = 70.4 ± 5.8 years) were evaluated for braking performance, as well as in several motor and cognitive performance tasks. The motor evaluation included isokinetic ankle plantar flexor muscle strength, handgrip strength, and postural balance with and without a cognitive task. The cognitive assessment included the Mini Mental State Examination. Braking performance was measured using a driving simulator …
Paulo Marchetti |Acute Effects on Maximal Isometric Force with and without Knee Wrap During Squat Exercise| Willy Andrade Gomes, Érica Paes Serpa, Enrico Gori Soares, Josinaldo Jarbas da Silva, Daniel Corrêa, Fernando Henrique Domingues de Oliveira, Francisco de Abreu Neto, Gustavo Martins, Guanis de Barros Vilela Junior, Paulo Henrique Marchetti| 2014| International Journal of Sports Science| 4| 2| 47-49| | The aim of this study was to investigate the acute effects on maximal isometric force without and with two kinds of knee wraps (hard and soft) during squat exercise. Ten physical active participants were evaluated during this study. All subjects were familiarized with the isometric squat position in all conditions: without and with knee wrap (hard and soft stiffness). The squat exercise position was set up individually, guaranteeing their thigh parallel to the floor, the arms crossed on the chest, and the feet were kept always in the same position for all trials and conditions. All subjects performed three maximal isometric squat contractions in 3 different conditions: without knee wrap (WKW), with soft knee wrap (SKW) and with hard knee wrap (HKW). The peak of force was acquired at a 100Hz sampling frequency, during 3 seconds, 5 minutes of resting and all conditions were randomized. The results shows significant differences for peak force between conditions WKW and HKW (P= 0.029, ES= 1.27, Δ%= 22%]) and WKW and SKW (P= 0.038, ES= 1.20, Δ%= 21%]). The use of the knee wrap under the presented conditions seem to increase the maximal isometric force during the squat exercise, independent of the level of stiffness of the knee wrap.
Paulo Marchetti |Eletromiografia: uma breve revisão sobre os procedimentos de aquisição do sinal| PH Marchetti, M Duarte| 2011| Terapia Manual| 9| 44| 548-553| | 
Paulo Marchetti |Aspectos biomecânicos da unidade músculo tendínea sob efeito do alongamento| Erica Paes Serpa, Guanis de Barros Vilela Junior, Paulo Henrique Marchetti| 2014| Revista CPAQV-Centro de Pesquisas Avançadas em Qualidade de Vida-CPAQV Journal| 6| 1| | | A literatura científica considera que um dos principais mecanismos para o aumento da amplitude de movimento (ADM) está relacionado as alterações das estruturas da unidade músculo-tendínea (UMT) e que, agudamente, tais alterações podem afetar componentes biomecânicos da UMT. A compreensão de como o exercício de alongamento afeta a UMT auxilia os profissionais a aplicar corretamente está técnica. O objetivo foi revisar a literatura científica sobre os efeitos mecânicos na UMT após sessões agudas de alongamento. O tecido biológico da UMT apresenta diferentes propriedades viscoelásticas que podem ser afetadas com a aplicação de exercícios de alongamento. Portanto, principal efeito mecânico do alongamento estático agudo é a diminuição da tensão passiva da UMT, o que leva a uma maior ADM da articulação e a diminuição do pico de tensão da musculatura, provavelmente devido a …
Paulo Marchetti |Efeito agudo dos exercícios de flexibilidade no desempenho de força máxima e resistência de força de membros inferiores e superiores| Anderson Caetano Paulo, Carlos Ugrinowitsch, Gerson dos Santos Leite, Gisela Arsa, Paulo Henrique Marchetti, Valmor Alberto Augusto Tricoli| 2012| Motriz: Revista de Educação Física| 18| 2| 345-355| Universidade Estadual Paulista| Este estudo verificou o efeito agudo dos exercícios de flexibilidade estática (EFlex) no desempenho de força máxima (FM) e de resistência de força (RF) em membros inferiores e superiores. Treze voluntários participaram do estudo e foram submetidos a testes de FM e RF (70% 1RM) nos exercícios supino e agachamento precedidos ou não de EFlex. O teste T pareado foi utilizado para comparação das médias nas duas condições. Os EFlex diminuíram a FM no agachamento (141, 2±34, 2 vs 132±34, 9kg; p= 0,007) e no supino (77, 5±21, 7 vs 71, 7±17, 7kg p= 0, 04). A RF no agachamento não sofreu efeito dos EFlex (16, 2±5, 7 vs 16, 3±6, 8 repetições p= 0, 48), porém, no supino a RF apresentou diminuição significante (11, 7±4, 8 vs 9, 9±5, 1 repetições; p= 0,008). Portanto, os EFlex reduziram a FM nos membros inferiores e superiores e a RF somente nos membros superiores. Essa diferença na RF estaria relacionada ao volume de exercícios de flexibilidade pelo tamanho do grupo muscular.
Paulo Marchetti |Muscle Activation Differs between Three Different Knee Joint-Angle Positions during a Maximal Isometric Back Squat Exercise| P.H. MARCHETTI, J.J. DA SILVA, B.J. SCHOENFELD, P.S.M NARDI, A.C. ALONSO, J.M.D GREVE, E.H. HARTIGAN| 2016| Journal of Sports Medicine| 2016| | 1-7| | The purpose of this study was to compare muscle activation of the lower limb muscles when performing a maximal isometric back squat exercise over three different positions. Fifteen young, healthy, resistance-trained men performed an isometric back squat at three knee joint angles (20°, 90°, and 140°) in a randomized, counterbalanced fashion. Surface electromyography was used to measure muscle activation of the vastus lateralis (VL), vastus medialis (VM), rectus femoris (RF), biceps femoris (BF), semitendinosus (ST), and gluteus maximus (GM). In general, muscle activity was the highest at 90° for the three quadriceps muscles, yet differences in muscle activation between knee angles were muscle specific. Activity of the GM was significantly greater at 20° and 90° compared to 140°. The BF and ST displayed similar activation at all joint angles. In conclusion, knee position alters muscles activation of the quadriceps and gluteus maximus muscles. An isometric back squat at 90° generates the highest overall muscle activation, yet an isometric back squat at 140° generates the lowest overall muscle activation of the VL and GM only.
Paulo Marchetti |Can the technique of knee wrap placement affect the maximal isometric force during back squat exercise?| P.H. MARCHETTI, V.J.P MATOS, E.G SOARES, J.J. SILVA, E.P. SERPA, D.A. CORRÊA, G. MARTINS, G.B. VILELA JUNIOR, W.A. GOMES| 2015| International Journal of Sports Science| 5| 1| 16-18| SAP| The aim of this study was to investigate the acute effects on maximal isometric force with two different techniques of knee wraps placement (spiral and X) during back squat exercise. Twenty-one physical active participants were evaluated during this study. The back squat exercise position was set up individually, guaranteeing their thigh parallel to the floor, the arms crossed on the chest, and the feet were kept always in the same position for all trials and conditions. All subjects performed three maximal isometric back squat contractions in 4 different conditions: without knee wrap (WKW), with spiral knee wrap technique (SKW), with X knee wrap technique (XKW) and tensor (T). The peak force was acquired at a 100Hz sampling frequency, during 3 seconds, 5 minutes of resting and all conditions were randomized. The Rating of Perceived Exertion (RPE) was evaluated after each trial and condition. The results shows significant differences for peak force between conditions SKW vs WKW (P= 0.044, ES= 0.55, Δ%= 10.8%), and XKW vs WKW (P= 0.009, ES= 0.62, Δ%= 13.6%). The use of different knee wrap techniques (spiral and X techniques) presented an effective carry-over effect, but without differences between techniques, and the RPE was similar in all conditions.
Paulo Marchetti |Revisão dos efeitos biomecânicos do uso de banda elástica no joelho durante o agachamento no levantamento básico| Willy Gomes Andrade, Marilia Coutinho, Paulo Henrique Marchetti| 2013| Revista CPAQV-Centro de Pesquisas Avançadas em Qualidade de Vida| 5| 3| 1-15| | 
Paulo Marchetti |The Effects of Uni-and Bilateral Fatigue on Postural and Power Tasks| Paulo H Marchetti, Maria IV Orselli, Marcos Duarte| 2013| Journal of Applied Biomechanics 2013 Human Kinetics, Inc| 29| 1| 44-48| Human Kinetics, Inc| The aim of this study was to investigate the effects of unilateral and bilateral fatigue on both postural and power bipedal tasks. Ten healthy subjects performed two tasks: bipedal quiet standing and a maximal bipedal counter-movement jumping before and after unilateral (with either the dominant or nondominant lower limb) and bilateral (with both lower limbs) fatigue. We employed two force plates (one under each lower limb) to measure the ground reaction forces and center of pressure produced by subjects during the tasks. To quantify the postural sway during quiet standing, we calculated the resultant center of pressure (COP) speed and COP area of sway, as well as the mean weight distribution between lower limbs. To quantify the performance during the countermovement jumping, we calculated the jump height and the peak force of each lower limb. We observed that both unilateral and bilateral fatigue …
Paulo Marchetti |Selective activation of the rectus abdominis muscle during low-intensity and fatiguing tasks| Paulo H Marchetti, André F Kohn, Marcos Duarte| 2011/6| Journal of sports science & medicine| 10| 2| 322| Dept. of Sports Medicine, Medical Faculty of Uludag University| In order to understand the potential selective activation of the rectus abdominis muscle, we conducted two experiments. In the first, subjects performed two controlled isometric exercises: the curl up (supine trunk raise) and the leg raise (supine bent leg raise) at low intensity (in which only a few motor units are recruited). In the second experiment, subjects performed the same exercises, but they were required to maintain a certain force level in order to induce fatigue. We recorded the electromyographic (EMG) activities of the lower and upper portions of the rectus abdominis muscle during the exercises and used spatial-temporal and frequency analyses to describe muscle activation patterns. At low-intensity contractions, the ratio between the EMG intensities of the upper and lower portions during the curl up exercise was significantly larger than during the leg raise exercise (p= 0.02). A cross-correlation analysis …
Paulo Marchetti |Effect of Resistance Training Frequency on Neuromuscular Performance and Muscle Morphology after Eight Weeks in Trained Men.| Felipe Alves Brigatto, Tiago Volpi Braz, TCDC Zanini, Moisés Diego Germano, Marcelo Saldanha Aoki, Brad Jon Schoenfeld, Paulo Henrique Marchetti, Charles Ricardo Lopes| 2019| Journal of strength and conditioning research| | | | | The purpose of this study was to investigate the chronic effects of training muscle groups 1 day per week vs. 2 days per week on neuromuscular performance and morphological adaptations in trained men with the number of sets per muscle group equated between conditions. Participants were randomly assigned in 2 experimental groups: 1 session· wk per muscle group (G1, n= 10), where every muscle group was trained once a week with 16 sets or 2 sessions· wk per muscle group (G2, n= 10), where every muscle group was trained twice a week with 8 sets per session. All other variables were held constant over the 8-week study period. No significant difference between conditions for maximal strength in the back squat or bench press, muscle thickness in the elbow extensors, elbow flexors, or quadriceps femoris, and muscle endurance in the back squat and bench press performed at 60% 1RM was detected. Effect size favored G2 for some outcome measurements, suggesting the potential of a slight benefit to the higher training frequency. In conclusion, both G1 and G2 significantly enhance neuromuscular adaptations, with a similar change noted between experimental conditions.
Paulo Marchetti |Objective and subjective variables for monitoring of different season cycles in basketball players| Gerson dos Santos Leite, Jonato Prestes, Christiano Bertoldo Urtado, Paulo H Marchetti, Carlos Roberto Padovani, Carlos Roberto Pereira Padovani, Maria Regina Ferreira Brandão, João Paulo Borin| 2012/8| Revista Brasileira de Medicina do Esporte| 18| 4| 229-233| Sociedade Brasileira de Medicina do Exercício e do Esporte| O presente estudo teve o objetivo de avaliar, comparar e relacionar carga e cansaço causado por treinamento durante um ciclo de periodização em jogadores de basquete. Oito atletas profissionais masculinos com idade de 21, 9±3, 4 anos, todos participantes do Campeonato Paulista de Basquete, divisão especial, foram sujeitos deste estudo. O macrociclo analisado incluiu 19 semanas divididas nos seguintes períodos: preparatório, competitivo I e competitivo II (tendo 4, 6 e nove semanas, respectivamente). Os autores avaliaram os atletas diariamente quanto à percepção subjetiva de cansaço e carga de treinamento e monitoraram a potência de membro superior dos atletas através da quantificação de sua capacidade de lançar uma bola medicinal. Os atletas apresentaram menos fadiga (p< 0,005) no período preparatório (13, 71±1, 30) em comparação com os períodos competitivo I (14, 68±1, 51) e competitivo II (14, 63±1, 22). Sua habilidade de lançar a bola medicinal diminuiu (p< 0,005) no período competitivo II (3, 59±0, 30) em comparação com os períodos preparatório (3, 80±0, 36) e competitivo I (3, 86±0, 26). Sua monotonia diminuiu (p< 0,001) no período competitivo II (1, 18±0, 43) em comparação com o preparatório (2, 50±2, 01) e competitivo I (2, 10±1, 61). Os resultados revelaram a efetividade na monitoração da carga e cansaço dos atletas através do método proposto para auxiliar na organização do treinamento durante um macrociclo.
Paulo Marchetti |Efeito agudo da ordem de exercícios tradicional e pré-exaustão no treinamento de força. (Acute effects on pre-exhaustion and traditional exercise order in resistance training).| E.G SOARES, W.A. GOMES, A.C. PAULODETTO, E.P. SERPA, J.J. SILVA, G.B. VILELA JUNIOR, P.H. MARCHETTI| 2016| Revista Brasileira de Medicina do Esporte| 22| 1| 27-30| | SOARES, Enrico Gori et al. EFECTO AGUDO DE LA ORDEN DE EJERCICIOS TRADICIONALES Y PRE-AGOTAMIENTO EN EL ENTRENAMIENTO DE FUERZA. Rev Bras Med Esporte [online]. 2016, vol. 22, n. 1, pp. 27-30. ISSN 1517-8692. http://dx. doi. org/10.1590/1517-869220162201147847.
Paulo Marchetti |Effects of Pre-Season Short-Term Daily Undulating Periodized Training on Muscle Strength and Sprint Performance of Under-20 Soccer Players| Charles Ricardo Lopes, Alex Harley Crisp, Moisés Diego Germano, Renê Scarpari Mattos, Márcio Antonio Gonsalves Sindorf, Gustavo Ribeiro Mota, Paulo Henrique Marchetti, Rozangela Verlengia| 2015| International Journal of Science Culture and Sport| 3| 2| 64-72| 2148-1148| 
Paulo Marchetti |Planejamento e prescrição do treinamento personalizado: do iniciante ao avançado| PH Marchetti, CR Lopes, DA CORRÊA| 2014| São Paulo: Mundo| | | | | 
Paulo Marchetti |Diferentes aquecimentos no desempenho de repetições máximas na musculação| Danilo Atanázio da Luz Junior, Aylton Figueira Junor, Érica Paes Serpa, Willy Andrade Gomes, Enrico Gori Soares, Charles Ricardo Lopes, Luis Felipe Milano Teixeira, Paulo Henrique Marchetti| 2014| Rev. bras. med. esporte| 20| 6| 461-464| | OBJETIVO:
Avaliar o efeito de diferentes estratégias de aquecimento no desempenho neuromuscular em adultos jovens submetidos a testes de repetições máximas de membro superior e inferior.
MÉTODOS:
Dois experimentos foram realizados separadamente. Para o primeiro experimento, 16 adultos jovens hígidos realizaram um teste de repetições máximas a 70% de 1RM no supino reto (previamente determinado). Quatro condições de aquecimento foram testadas: Controle (CON) sem aquecimento prévio, esteira (EST) 5'a 60% VO2max, resistência de força (REF) 15 repetições com 40% de 1RM e força máxima (FM) duas séries de duas repetições com 90% de 1RM. Para o segundo experimento, 14 adultos jovens hígidos, realizaram um teste de repetições máximas a 70% de 1RM no leg press unilateral (previamente determinado). Cinco condições de aquecimento foram testadas: controle (CON) sem aquecimento prévio, esteira (EST) 5'a 60% VO2max, bicicleta (BIC) 5'a 60% VO2max, resistência de força (REF) 15 repetições com 40% de 1RM e força máxima (FM) duas séries de duas repetições com 90% de 1RM. Para ambos os experimentos o número de repetições realizadas e a percepção subjetiva de esforço foram avaliadas.
RESULTADOS:
Para o primeiro experimento o protocolo FM foi superior a todos os outros protocolos. Não foram observadas diferenças entre as outras condições. Para o segundo experimento, foi observado diferenças entre todos os protocolos, exceto CON e EST. Sendo FM> BIC> REF> EST= CON.
CONCLUSÃO:
Os resultados do presente estudo sugerem que um aquecimento...
Biblioteca responsável …
Paulo Marchetti |Alongamento passivo agudo não afeta a atividade muscular máxima dos ísquiotibiais| AS Bley, PS Nardi, PH Marchetti| 2012/12| Motricidade| 8| 4| 80-86| Revista Motricidade/Edições Desafio Singular| The acute stretching may influence the force production in different tasks and sports performances. The aim of this study was to investigate the influence of acute passive stretch on the electrical activity of the biceps femoris (BF) and hamstring muscle (HS) strength. Fourteen young adults, sedentary took part of this study. The subjects were asked to produce the maximal isometric contractions before and after a passive stretching protocol. The stretching protocol consisted of three attempts at 60 seconds and resting 15 seconds between each attempt. The subjects were analyzed using the following techniques: maximal isometric force (MIF), integrated electromyography (IEMG) and median frequency (Fmed) of the EMG signal of the BF before and after stretching. We performed the MIF, IEMG and Fmed of the EMG signal under these conditions and compared using a paired Student t test. The MIF of the biceps femoris (14.1 ± 4.9 e 13.1 ± 4.5 Kgf, respectively, p = .12), IEMG (208.4 ± 89.9 e 189.3 ± 75 V.s, respectively, p = .059), and FMed (22.7 ± 4 e 23.4 ± 5.5 Hz, respectively, p = .52) showed no significant differences between conditions before and after stretching. The acute effects of passive stretching did not significantly influence the pattern of electrical activation of the BF and the maximal isometric force produced by the HS.
Paulo Marchetti |Influence of unilateral fatigue of lower limbs on the bilateral vertical jump| Paulo Henrique Marchetti, Marco Carlos Uchida| 2011/12| Revista Brasileira de Medicina do Esporte| 17| 6| 405-408| Sociedade Brasileira de Medicina do Exercício e do Esporte| It is common to observe bilateral strength deficit during the vertical jump. This is characterized by lower strength produced during bilateral contractions, when compared to the sum of the unilateral contractions of similar muscles. There is not much scientific knowledge about the effect of unilateral fatigue on bilateral activities. The aim of this study was to investigate the effect of unilateral fatigue on bilateral deficit performance during bipedal vertical jump. Ten sedentary young adults unilaterally fatigued each lower limb and performed vertical jumps (bipedal and unipedal). We measured the vertical ground reaction force and myoelectrical activity to each lower limb and conditions (pre-fatigue, fatigue of the dominant limb (FD) and non dominant limb (FND)) were measured. Differences between tasks and conditions only on the pre-fatigue (p=0.030) were observed. Differences were observed for the bipedal vertical jump between pre-fatigue and FD (p=0.005), and unipedal vertical jump between pre-fatigue and FD (p<0.001) and FND (p<0.001). We only observed change on the performance of bipedal vertical jump during the FD condition. We observed a trend to the asymmetry index decrease for the muscular action of the fatigued contralateral lower limb by electromyography. The results suggest that there is a common command where the nervous system considers the muscles simultaneously activated as a unit, except in conditions of unilateral lower limb fatigue.
Paulo Marchetti |Influência da fadiga unilateral de membro inferior sobre o salto vertical bilateral| Paulo Henrique Marchetti, Marco Carlos Uchida| 2011| Rev. bras. med. esporte| 17| 6| 405-408| | Em saltos verticais é comum a verificação do déficit de força bilateral. Essa é caracterizada pela menor força gerada em contrações bilaterais, quando comparada à soma das contrações unilaterais dos mesmos músculos. Pouco se conhece sobre o efeito da fadiga unilateral sobre atividades bilaterais. O objetivo do estudo foi verificar o efeito da fadiga unilateral sobre o rendimento e o déficit bilateral durante saltos verticais bipedais. Dez adultos jovens sedentários fatigaram unilateralmente cada membro inferior e realizaram saltos verticais (bipedal e unipedal). Foram medidas a força de reação do solo vertical e a atividade mioelétrica de cada membro em cada condição (pré-fadiga, fadiga do membro dominante (FD) e não dominante (FND)). Houve diferença entre tarefas e condições apenas na pré-fadiga (p= 0,030). Verificaram-se diferenças para o salto bipedal entre a condição de pré-fadiga e FD (p= 0,005), e no salto unipedal, entre a pré-fadiga e FD (p< 0,001) e FND (p< 0,001). Apenas durante a condição de FD houve alteração no desempenho dos saltos bipedais, tendo maior influência no desempenho dos saltos. Observou-se tendência de diminuição do índice de assimetria para a ação muscular do membro contralateral fatigado, observado através de eletromiografia. Através dos dados sugere-se que exista um comando comum onde o sistema nervoso considere os músculos ativados simultaneamente como uma unidade, exceto em condições de fadiga unilateral.
Paulo Marchetti |Muscle Activation Differs Between Partial And Full Back Squat Exercise With External Load Equated.| Josinaldo Jarbas da Silva, Brad Jon Schoenfeld, Priscyla Nardi Marchetti, Silvio Luis Pecoraro, Julia Maria DAndréa Greve, Paulo Henrique Marchetti| 2017| Journal of Strength & Conditioning Research| 31| 6| 1688-1693| | ABSTRACT da Silva, JJ, Schoenfeld, BJ, Marchetti, PN, Pecoraro, SL, Greve, JMD, and Marchetti, PH. Muscle activation differs between partial and full back squat exercise with external load equated. J Strength Cond Res 31 (6): 1688–1693, 2017—Changes in range of motion affect the magnitude of the load during the squat exercise and, consequently, may influence muscle activation. The purpose of this study was to evaluate muscle activation between the partial and full back squat exercise with external load equated on a relative basis between conditions. Fifteen young, healthy, resistance-trained men (age: 26 6 5 years, height: 173 6 6 cm) performed a back squat at their 10 repetition maximum (10RM) using 2 different ranges of motion (partial and full) in a randomized, counterbalanced fashion. Surface electromyography was used to measure muscle activation of the vastus lateralis, vastus medialis, rectus …
Paulo Marchetti |Efeito agudo do alongamento passivo extensivo no desempenho de séries múltiplas no treinamento do força. (Effects of extensive passive stretching protocol on multiple sets …| Charles Ricardo Lopes, Enrico Gori Soares, A.L.R. Santos, Marcelo Saldanha Aoki, Paulo Henrique Marchetti| 2015| Revista Brasileira de Medicina do Esporte| 21| 3| 224-229| | Introduction:
Stretching exercises have been related to a performance deficit on strength-dependent activities. However, little is known about its effect on multiple sets of strength training.
Objective:
To determine the effect of an extensive stretching protocol on the performance of multiple sets and soreness in strength training.
Methods:
The sample was composed by 12 trained-men, experienced in strength training. The protocol consisted of three sessions. The first session was used as a familiarization and load determination to 10 maximum repetitions (T10RM). The second and third conditions were randomized between subjects, and the bench press exercise (BP) was evaluated without previous stretching protocol (SEMA), and with previous stretching protocol (COMA). The stretching protocol consisted of six sets of 45 sec of stretch with 15 sec of resting intervals to the pectoralis major muscle. The stretching intensity was kept between 70 and 90% of the subjective point of discomfort. The local soreness was evaluated before and after exercise by a brief stretching and palpation. The Analysis of Variance ANOVA (2x6) was used to compare the maximum number of repetitions. One-way ANOVA was used to compare the load of the first set of each condition (T10RM/SEMA/COMA). The Student t-test was used to compare the total load and soreness.
Results:
A decrease on maximum number of repetitions along the sets was observed in both conditions, without differences between them, for the load of the first set, total load and soreness.
Conclusion:
The number of repetitions in multiple sets was reduced in the same magnitude in the conditions with …
Paulo Marchetti |Efeito da ordem dos exercícios no treinamento de força| Enrico Gori Soares, Paulo Henrique Marchetti| 2013| Revista CPAQV-Centro de Pesquisas Avançadas em Qualidade de Vida| 5| 3| 1-14| | Diversos estudos demonstram que a ordem de execução dos exercícios influenciam a performance neuromuscular em uma sessão de treinamento, e conseqüentemente as suas respostas ao treinamento. O objetivo do presente estudo foi revisar a literatura científica quanto aos efeitos da ordem dos exercícios na performance neuromuscular durante o treinamento de força. Observa-se que o efeito da ordem dos exercícios durante uma sessão de treinamento pode influenciar a performance neuromuscular quando realizados no início da sessão de treinamento quando comparada à sua realização ao final da sessão de treino. A percepção subjetiva de esforço parece não ser afetada pela ordem de execução dos exercícios e o sistema nervoso central parece alterar o padrão de recrutamento dos músculos em exercícios multiarticulares quando precedidos por um exercício monoarticular, aparentemente aumentando a solicitação dos músculos sinérgicos. Intervalos de recuperação maiores parecem afetar menos a performance neuromuscular quando comparados à intervalos menores, independente da sequência dos exercícios.
Paulo Marchetti |Aspectos neuromecânicos do exercício agachamento| Paulo H Marchetti| 2013| Revista CPAQV–Centro de Pesquisas Avançadas em Qualidade de Vida–ISSN| 5| 2| 2013| | Actually the strength training has been widely used in different contexts and for different purposes: athletic, recreational, esthetic and therapeutic. Undoubtedly, one of the most widely used exercises in strength training, aiming at the development of the muscles is the squat. The present study aimed to review several anatomical, biomechanical and kinesiological aspects of the squat exercise, as well as their possible variations as differences in lower limb positioning, the effects in the amplitude of the execution, differences between guided and non-guided exercise and the differences in positioning of the bar related to the trunk. The understanding of several variations can influence in the correct prescription, correction and orientation of this exercise for strength training or rehabilitation. In this way, after the review of several papers about this exercise, we can conclude that the different variations and conditions imposed on the squat exercise may result in changes in the action of muscles, kinematics and kinetic, and consequently increasing or decreasing their performance and/or efficiency.
Paulo Marchetti |Differences in muscular performance between practitioners and non practitioners of Parkour| Paulo Henrique Marchetti, Danilo Atanázio Luz Junior, Enrico Gori Soares, Fernando Henrique Silva, Marco Carlos Uchida, Luis Felipe Milano Teixeira| 2012| International Journal of Sports Science| 2| 4| 36-41| | The aim of this study was to investigate the strength and power performance of Parkour practitioners and compare to those who do not. Eleven male Parkour practitioners and 12 male physical educators participated in this study and performed: pull-up test, handgrip strength dynamometer test (HSDT), p lyo metric push-up test, maximal horizontal ju mp, and maximal bipodal and unipodal countermovement jumps (CMJ). We calculated limb asymmetry for HSDT and CMJs and the bilateral deficit for CMJs. Significant differences were found between groups for the pull-up test (P= 0.002), plyometric push-up test (P= 0.039), bipodal CMJ (P< 0.001), dominant unipodal CMJ (P= 0.008), nondominant unipodal CMJ (P< 0.001), maximal horizontal jump (P< 0.001), and bilateral deficit (P< 0.004). The Parkour group presented higher performance than the active group, except for HSDT.
Paulo Marchetti |Investigações sobre o controle motor e postural nas assimetrias em membros inferiores| Paulo Henrique Marchetti| 2009| | | | | | Durante diferentes atividades cotidianas ou esportivas o ser humano é submetido a desafios unilaterais que podem estar relacionados à performance de uma tarefa específica ou a própria manutenção de sua postura. Portanto, é natural o desenvolvimento motor de um membro em relação ao outro para tarefas específicas, desde que estas sejam repetidas de forma não simétrica. Desta forma, pode-se supor que sujeitos que possuam maiores estresses físicos unilaterais apresentem maior probabilidade em desenvolver assimetrias funcionais e morfológicas. O presente trabalho apresenta três diferentes experimentos visando investigar as assimetrias funcionais e morfológicas relacionadas ao controle de movimento para tarefas dinâmicas e estáticas em diferentes condições e grupos. O primeiro experimento visou investigar as diferenças, entre os membros inferiores, no controle de movimento entre sedentários e atletas, utilizando para isto a postura ereta quieta e o salto com contra-movimento nas condições bipedais e unipedais. O segundo experimento visou investigar o efeito da fadiga neuromuscular unilateral e bilateral no controle de movimento, entre membros, durante o salto com contra-movimento e a postura ereta quieta bipedal. O terceiro experimento objetivou investigar o efeito prolongado da temporada esportiva no controle de movimento, entre membros, de atletas, utilizando o salto com contra-movimento e a postura ereta quieta nas condições unipedal e bipedal. Inicialmente, o presente trabalho concluiu que não parece existir relação entre as diferenças antropométricas e funcionais. Indivíduos sedentários e atletas …
Paulo Marchetti |Effect of eccentric velocity on muscle damage markers after bench press exercise in resistance-trained men.| T.B. CARVALHO, A.H. CRISP, C.R. LOPES, M.D. CREPALDI, R.D. CALIXTO, A.A. PEREIRA, J.O. SILVA, A.K. YAMADA, P.H. MARCHETTI, R. VERLENGIA| 2015| Gazzeta Medica Italiana| 174| 1| 1-7| | Aim. The purpose of this study was to determine how the execution velocity of eccentric exercises affects postexercise muscle damage in resistance-trained males using free-weight exercises.
Methods. Twenty young males were divided by maximum eccentric strength into two groups: slow eccentric velocity (SEV, N.= 10) and fast eccentric velocity (FEV, N.= 10). Both groups performed four sets of eight repetitions with 70% of their one repetition maximum eccentric in a bench press exercise with a 2-minute rest interval between sets. Each group lifted an equal total volume load. The eccentric velocity was controlled to 3 seconds for the SEV group and 0.5 seconds for the FEV group. The 1RM test, delayed onset muscle soreness (DOMS), and creatine kinase (CK) activity were evaluated before and up to 96 hours postexercise.
Results. A significant reduction (compared with baseline values) in 1RM test was observed up to 48 hours postexercise for the FEV group, while a significant reduction for the SEV group was only observed at 24 hours. The FEV group had a significant increase in DOMS up to 72 hours postexercise while the SEV group experienced an increase lasting up to 48 hours. The serum CK activity increased significantly only at 72 hours postexercise for both groups. There were no significant differences for any of the indirect analyses of muscle damage when the values were compared between groups. Conclusion. In conclusion, a six-fold differ-
Paulo Marchetti |A Eletromiografia de superfície em estudos relativos a produção de força.| Dayna K. G. Noda, Paulo H. Marchetti, Guanis B. Vilela Jr| 2014| Revista CPAQV| 6| 3| 1-25| | Objetivo:
Apresentar os diferentes usos da técnica eletromiográfica (EMG) dentro da área das ciências do movimento humano.
Métodos:
Focado para o treinamento físico, trás consigo 105 artigos que compõem a base desta revisão e tiveram suas metodologias e resultados relatados em tabelas de acordo com as especificações dos estudos, fadiga muscular localizada em diversos músculos da musculatura esquelética e produção de força muscular.
Resultados:
36 autores estudaram a fadiga muscular, dente estes, 11 a estudaram nos músculos da região abdominal, os autores que estudaram a produção de força muscular, tanto em protocolos isométricos como dinâmicos, foram 25 ao todo.
Conclusão:
Sendo uma das mais usadas técnicas para o estudo da atividade neuromuscular, talvez o seu maior problema ainda seja a falta de padronização dos protocolos e metodologias para melhor possibilidade de comparação dos resultados entre as pesquisas.
Paulo Marchetti |Comparison of the Postural Control Performance of Collegiate Basketball Players and Nonathletes| Paulo Henrique Marchetti, Erin Heather Hartigan, Marcos Duarte| 2012| Athletic Training & Sports Health Care| 4| 6| 251-256| | Athletes who play basketball are at risk for ankle injuries. Whether athletes demonstrate different postural stability and limb asymmetry during a quiet standing task compared with nonathletes is unknown. Fifteen collegiate basketball players and 15 nonathletes performed 3 trials of bipedal quiet standing for 30 s with 60 s of rest. Postural stability measures were obtained for each limb: integration of the resultant of the center of pressure (COP) speed (anteroposterior [AP] and mediolateral [ML] directions); COP area; and frequency (AP and ML). An asymmetry index between lower limbs was calculated for COP speed (AP and ML), COP area, and weight distribution. Basketball players demonstrated less COP speed (ML)(P=. 039), decreased levels of asymmetry for COP speed (P=. 033), and reduced COP area (P=. 005) and COP speed in the ML direction, compared with nonathletes. Whether this reduction influences …
Paulo Marchetti |The contract-relax proprioceptive neuromuscular facilitation stretching can affect the dynamic balance in healthy men.| A. GHRAM, M. DAMAK, F. RHIBI, P.H. MARCHETTI| 2016| Medical Express| 3| 04| 1-7| | GHRAM, Amine; DAMAK, Mohamed; RHIBI, Fatma and MARCHETTI, Paulo Henrique. A FACILITAÇÃO NEUROMUSCULAR PROPRIOCEPTIVA POR CONTRAÇÃO-RELAXAMENTO PODE AFETAR O EQUILÍBRIO DINÂMICO EM HOMENS SAUDÁVEIS. MedicalExpress (São Paulo, online)[online]. 2016, vol. 3, n. 4, M160404. ISSN 2318-8111. http://dx. doi. org/10.5935/MedicalExpress. 2016.04. 04.
OBJETIVO:
Este estudo teve como objetivo investigar o efeito de um protocolo de alongamento por facilitação neuromuscular proprioceptiva de contração-relaxamento sobre o equilíbrio dinâmico.
MÉTODOS:
Vinte jovens saudáveis do sexo masculino realizaram duas sessões oredenadas aleatoriamente; uma sessão com protocolo de alongamento por facilitação neuromuscular proprioceptiva de contração-relaxamento, e uma sessão sem esse protocolo. O equilíbrio dinâmico bipedal foi medido nas direções ântero-posterior e médio-lateral antes e após a conclusão das duas sessões experimentais, com os olhos abertos e fechados.
RESULTADOS:
O estudo mostrou que não há diferença significativa entre as duas sessões (com vs sem o protocolo de alongamento) no sentido ântero-posterior. No entanto, na direção médio-lateral, o protocolo de alongamento aumentou significativamente o equilíbrio dinâmico, quando comparado com a condição de protocolo sem alongamento.
CONCLUSÃO:
Este estudo permite concluir que o protocolo de alongamento por facilitação neuromuscular proprioceptiva de contração-relaxamento pode ser eficaz para melhorar o controle de equilíbrio dinâmico.
Paulo Marchetti |Effects of light-emitting diodes on muscle fatigue and exercise tolerance in patients with COPD: study protocol for a randomized controlled trial| Eduardo Foschini Miranda, Ernesto Cesar Pinto Leal-Junior, Paulo Henrique Marchetti, Simone Dal Corso| 2013/12| Trials| 14| 1| 134| BioMed Central| Light-emitting diodes (LED) have been used to minimize muscle fatigue in athletes and healthy subjects. Patients with chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD) are susceptible to early muscle fatigue. The objective of this study is to investigate the acute effects of LED on muscle function, exercise capacity and cardiorespiratory responses during isometric and dynamic exercise in patients with COPD. This study will assess 30 patients with moderate to severe obstruction (forced expiratory volume-one second,FEV1 ≤70% predicted). Isometric and dynamic protocols will be conducted in two visits each, for a total of four visits a week apart. First, venous blood will be taken from the patients. The isometric protocol will start with the determination of the maximum voluntary isometric contraction (MIVC) to determine the workload (60% of MIVC) for the isometric endurance test (IET). Patients will be randomized to receive either the placebo or LED application (each point will be irradiated for 30 s and the energy received at each point will be 41.7 J). Immediately after finishing this procedure, the patients will carry out the IET until the limit of tolerance or until a 20% fall of strength is observed. After the test, another blood draw will be taken. In another visit (one week later), the same order of procedures will be performed, except with the opposite (LED or placebo). For the dynamic endurance test (DET), the same procedures described above will be followed, except with 75% of the maximal workload obtained from the incremental cycle ergometer test used instead of the IET. The electromyography will be recorded during the isometric and dynamic protocols …
Paulo Marchetti |Parkour: história e conceitos da modalidade| Ana Luiza Martins Stramandinoli, Jarbas Gomes Remonte, Paulo Henrique Marchetti| 2012/8/17| Revista Mackenzie de Educação física e esporte| 11| 2| | | O Parkour é uma atividade física baseada em uma proposta do Método Natural (MN) e do Parcours Du Combattant (PDC). O objetivo do presente trabalho foi revisar aspectos históricos, além dos conceitos fundamentais da modalidade Parkour. George Hébert foi o criador do MN, antagônico à ginástica e à especialização esportiva. Publicou as bases do MN, utilizando gestos naturais e o desenvolvimento físico completo. O PDC, idealizado por Raymond Belle, foi adaptado do MN e do treinamento militar básico. David Belle continuou o legado de seu pai, baseado no conceito de que o treinamento deve ser aplicado à vida real e às situações extremas. Concluímos que os aspectos conceituais e históricos do Parkour são fundamentais para definir sua identidade dentro do contexto da área da Educação Física.
Paulo Marchetti |The central and peripheric fatigue: a brief review of the local and non-local effects on neuromuscular system| Willy Andrade Gomes, Charles Ricardo Lopes, Paulo Henrique Marchetti| 2016| Revista CPAQV–Centro de Pesquisas Avançadas em Qualidade de Vida| 8| 1| 2| | The fatigue can be defined as a gradual reduction of muscular efficiency in producing strength and power for extended periods, and it may occur in a peripheral and/or central system. Several mechanisms and systems can be affected by fatigue, so it is considered multifactorial. Fatigue can affect different locations through a variety of mechanisms, leading to reduced the performance in the specific activity, or subsequent task. Interestingly, the process of fatigue may involve both the fatigued limb (local fatigue) or not fatigued limb (non-local fatigue). Thus, the aim of this study was to perform a brief review of the effects of neuromuscular fatigue protocols on physical performance. Several mechanisms are related to neuromuscular fatigue, however, factors such as the type of muscle fiber, the gender, the experimental protocol, or the fitness level may influence the effects of local and nonlocal fatigue.
Paulo Marchetti |Fadiga central e periférica: uma breve revisão sobre os efeitos locais e não locais no sistema neuromuscular. (The central and peripheric fatigue: a brief review of the local …| W.A. GOMES, C.R. LOPES, P.H. MARCHETTI| 2016| CPAQV Journal| 8| 1| 1-20| | 
Paulo Marchetti |Acute Effects of Stretching Routines with and without Rest Intervals between Sets in the Bounce Drop Jump Performance| Paulo Henrique Marchetti, Enrico Gori Soares, Fernando Henrique Domingues Oliveira Silva, Priscyla Silva Monteiro Nardi, Érica Paes Serpa, Willy Andrade Gomes, Brad J. Schoenfeld| 2015| International Journal of Sports Science| 5| 1| 39-43| | The purpose of this study was to evaluate the acute effects of static-stretching (SS) session with (intermittent) and without (continuous) rest intervals between sets on the bounce drop jump performance, with the same volume and intensity. The experimental protocol consisted of (1) a brief warm-up using sub-maximal jumps;(2) a pre-SS evaluation (passive ankle ROM and three trials of maximal single-leg jumping task for each lower limb);(3) ankle plantar flexors SS protocol (intermittent or continuous) was used only for a single-lower limb;(4) immediate post-SS evaluation (passive ankle ROM and three trials of maximal single-leg jumping task for the stretched lower limb). Then, subjects rest for 30 minutes and the topics 3-4 were repeated with the other lower limb and stretching protocol. The intensity used for both stretching protocols was between 70-90% of the point of discomfort. There were significant decrease in jumping height performance for both stretching protocols: continuous (P= 0.001) and intermittent (P= 0.006). There were significant increase in contact time only for the continuous protocol (P= 0.025). Our findings indicated that both stretching protocols (intermittent or continuous) were effective to increase the passive ankle ROM, and to decrease the single-leg jump height, however only the continuous SS protocol showed increases in the contact time.
Paulo Marchetti |Efeito de diferentes durações do alongamento no desempenho de saltos unipodais| Paulo Henrique Marchetti, Enrico Gori Soares, Fernando Henrique Domingues Oliveira Silva, Iris Ilza de Medeiros, Ilídio dos Reis Neto, Charles Ricardo Lopes, Marco Carlos Uchida, Reury Frank Pereira Bacurau| 2014| Revista Brasileira de Medicina do Esporte| 20| 3| 223-226| | A prática de exercícios de alongamento é muito comum como parte do aquecimento em diversas modalidades esportivas, porém, esta prática pode ser negativa para aqueles que desejam o aprimoramento da força e potência muscular, consequentemente, o rendimento dos saltos pode ficar reduzido após exercícios de alongamento, que depende do tempo de duração e intensidade do mesmo.
OBJETIVO:
Avaliar a influência do tempo de permanência no exercício alongamento sobre o desempenho do drop jump unilateralmente (unipodal).
MÉTODOS:
A amostra foi composta por 16 adultos jovens hígidos, com larga experiência em saltos. O protocolo de teste consistiu em realizar três drop jumps unipodais máximos a partir de uma plataforma de 15 cm sobre um tapete de salto (Hidrofit (r)), antes e após duas durações (ie uma série 3 min. de um lado, e 6 min. para outro, a escolha foi de forma aleatória) de …
Paulo Marchetti |Effects of a full season on stabilometric Parameters of team handball elite athletes.| Paulo Henrique Marchetti, Maria Isabel Veras Orselli, Lúcio M. S. Martins, Marcos Duarte| 2014| Motriz| 20| 1| 71-77| | It is unclear whether athletes change their postural control over the course of a full sport season, or become more asymmetrical with respect to their neuromuscular performance over the same period. The aim of this study was to investigate the effects of a full sport season on the postural control of team handball elite athletes. Ten healthy, elite male team handball players performed bipodal standing (BP) and right and left unipodal standing (UP) during 30s. We used the RMS and speed of the center of pressure to describe postural sway. For the BP task, the sway was lower at the end of the season (p<0.005). For the UP tasks, the sway was lower at the end of the season only for the non-dominant limb (p<0.001). Differences between limbs were observed only at the end of the season (p<0.03). In conclusion, a full team handball season did not lead to deterioration of the athletes' postural control, but by the end of the season, the athletes were more asymmetrical.
Paulo Marchetti |High resistance-training frequency enhances muscle thickness in resistance-trained men| Rafael S Zaroni, Felipe A Brigatto, Brad J Schoenfeld, Tiago V Braz, Júlio C Benvenutti, Moisés D Germano, Paulo H Marchetti, Marcelo S Aoki, Charles R Lopes| 2019| The Journal of Strength & Conditioning Research| | | | LWW| Zaroni, RS, Brigatto, FA, Schoenfeld, BJ, Braz, TV, Benvenutti, JC, Germano, MD, Marchetti, PH, Aoki, MS, and Lopes, CR. High resistance-training frequency enhances muscle thickness in resistance-trained men. J Strength Cond Res XX (X): 000–000, 2018—The purpose of this study was to compare the effect a split training routine with muscle groups trained once per week (SPLIT) vs. whole-body split training routine with muscle groups trained 5 days per week (TOTAL) on neuromuscular adaptations in well-trained men. Eighteen healthy men (height= 177.8 6 6.6 cm; total body mass= 84.4 6 8.1 kg; age= 26.4 6 4.6 years) were recruited to participate in this study. The experimental groups were matched according to baseline strength and then randomly assigned to 1 of the 2 experimental groups: SPLIT (n= 9) or TOTAL (n= 9). Prestudy and poststudy testing included 1RM for bench press, parallel back-squat and machine close-grip seated row, as well as an ultrasound analysis of the muscle thickness (MT) of the elbow flexors, triceps brachii, and vastus lateralis. After 8 weeks of training, no significant difference between groups was noted for all 1RM tests (p. 0.05 AU2). TOTAL induced a significantly greater increase in MT of the forearm flexors and vastus lateralis (p, 0.05). In conclusion, muscle strength increment is similar regardless of the experimental conditions studied; however, TOTAL may confer a potentially superior hypertrophic effect.
Paulo Marchetti |The effect of different resistance training load schemes on strength and body composition in trained men.| C.R. LOPES, M.S. AOKI, CRISP, A. H., R.S. DE MATTOS, M.A. LINS, G.R. DA MOTTA, B.J. SCHOENFELD, P.H. MARCHETTI| 2017| Jounal of Human Kinetics| 58| | 177-186| | The purpose of this study was to evaluate the impact of moderate-load (10 RM) and low-load (20 RM) resistance training schemes on maximal strength and body composition. Sixteen resistance-trained men were randomly assigned to 1 of 2 groups: a moderate-load group (n= 8) or a low-load group (n= 8). The resistance training schemes consisted of 8 exercises performed 4 times per week for 6 weeks. In order to equate the number of repetitions performed by each group, the moderate load group performed 6 sets of 10 RM, while the low load group performed 3 sets of 20 RM. Between-group differences were evaluated using a 2-way ANOVA and independent t-tests. There was no difference in the weekly total load lifted (sets× reps× kg) between the 2 groups. Both groups equally improved maximal strength and measures of body composition after 6 weeks of resistance training, with no significant between-group …
Paulo Marchetti |Physical activity level does not influence the neuromuscular fatigue in adults| F.S. SUZUKI, M.M. KALYTCZAK, C.A.S CASARIN, A.J. SERRA, A.L. EVANGELISTA, P.H. MARCHETTI, F. POLITTI, A.J. FIGUEIRA JUNIOR, J.S. BACKER, D.S. BOCALINI| 2016| Revista Brasileira de Medicina do Esporte| 22| 2| 97-101| | SUZUKI, Frank Shiguemitsu et al. NÍVEL DE ATIVIDADE FÍSICA NÃO INFLUENCIA A FADIGA NEUROMUSCULAR EM ADULTOS. Rev Bras Med Esporte [online]. 2016, vol. 22, n. 2, pp. 97-101. ISSN 1517-8692. http://dx. doi. org/10.1590/1517-869220162202150282.
Paulo Marchetti |Os efeitos do treinamento de força na pressão intraocular| DT Tamura, M Conte, PH Marchetti| 2012| | 4| 1| | Pulsar| 
Paulo Marchetti |Aspectos neuromecânicos do exercício pulley| Paulo Henrique Marchetti, Mariana Antas de Amorim, Claudinei Campos Arruda, Enrico Gori Soares, Daniel Takeshi Ito, Danilo Atanázio da Luz Junior| 2011/3/23| Revista de Atenção à Saúde (antiga Rev. Bras. Ciên. Saúde)| 8| 26| | | Muitos são os exercícios utilizados para o desenvolvimento dos músculos que envolvem os membros superiores (particularmente o latíssimo do dorso, peitoral maior, redondo maior, deltóide parte espinal e bíceps braquial). Diversos são os fatores biomecânicos do exercício pulley que podem seletivizar atividades musculares e/ou a efetividade do programa de treino como o deslocamento da barra em relação ao tronco, os diferentes tipos de pegada (supinada e pronada) e as variações no comprimento da pegada na barra. O entendimento destas variações técnicas do exercício pulley podem influenciar a correta prescrição durante o treinamento de força. O presente trabalho teve como objetivo revisar aspectos anatômicos, cinesiológicos e biomecânicos do exercício pulley e suas variações. Poucos são os estudos que analisam as variações na técnica do exercício pulley, mas puderam ser observadas que diferentes alterações mecânicas realizadas podem acarretar em mudanças na ação dos músculos envolvidos neste exercício, aumentando ou diminuindo a performance e/ou sua eficiência.
Paulo Marchetti |Efeito da massagem na remoção da fadiga entre as séries do treinamento de força| Paulo Henrique Marchetti, Marcelo Gonçalves| 2006| ConScientiae Saúde| | 5| 35-38| Universidade Nove de Julho| Apesar da intensa utilização da massagem no esporte, existem poucas evidências que comprovem sua eficiência na recuperação pós-exercício, principalmente no que se refere ao treinamento de força. Este estudo investigou o efeito da aplicação ou não da massagem na remoção da fadiga em 12 sujeitos saudáveis. Os resultados mostraram que a massagem, como intervenção, parece ser uma forma efetiva de remoção da fadiga comparada ao repouso entre as séries no treinamento de força.
Paulo Marchetti |Alterações posturais durante a postura natural em idosos| Sandra M Sheghen Ferreira, Silvana A Wieczorek, Paulo H Marchetti, Marcos Duarte| 2003| Anais. V. 1| | | | | FERREIRA, Sandra M. Sheghen; WIECZOREK, Silvana A.; MARCHETTI, Paulo H.; DUARTE, Marcos. Alterações posturais durante a postura natural em idosos. Anais.. Belo Horizonte: Sociedade Brasileira de Biomecânica, 2003 … Ferreira, SMS, Wieczorek, SA, Marchetti, PH, & Duarte, M. (2003). Alterações posturais durante a postura natural em idosos. In Anais. V.1. Belo Horizonte: Sociedade Brasileira de Biomecânica.
Paulo Marchetti |Efeitos do treinamento de força e flexibilidade em pacientes com osteoartrite de joelho| Andre Serra Bley, Jeniffer Nunes Medrado, Cyntia Aparecida Neres Santiago, Neide Balheira Nunes, Rodrigo Alcorinte Hubinger, Paulo Henrique Marchetti| 2016| Revista CPAQV–Centro de Pesquisas Avançadas em Qualidade de Vida| Vol| 8| 2| 2| | Introdução:
O tratamento fisioterapêutico voltado para os indivíduos com osteoartrite de joelho (OAJ) é baseado no fortalecimento e alongamento muscular visando a melhora da amplitude de movimento, estabilidade e biomecânica articular, promovendo alívio da dor e conseqüentemente melhora funcional.
Objetivo:
avaliar os efeitos de um protocolo de treinamento de resistência e flexibilidade dos membros inferiores na dor, rigidez e função de pacientes com OAJ.
Materiais e Métodos:
Foram incluídos 16 voluntários, sedentários, sendo 14 mulheres e 2 homens, com idade entre 54 e 81 anos, com diagnóstico de OAJ há mais de 2 anos, uni ou bilateral, confirmado por alterações radiográficas. Os voluntários foram submetidos a um protocolo de tratamento utilizando fortalecimento e alongamento, bilateralmente, visando a estimulação da musculatura envolvida nos movimentos articulares de quadril, joelho e tornozelo. O tratamento foi realizado 3 vezes por semana, durante 8 semanas consecutivas, totalizando 24 sessões de 60 minutos. Antes da primeira sessão e após a realização da última sessão do tratamento, foi aplicado o questionário WOMAC para OAJ por um avaliador previamente treinado, sendo o mesmo em ambas as condições. O Teste t de Student dependente foi utilizado para verificar as diferenças entre os índices para as condições de tratamento (pré e pós).
Resultados:
Foram verificadas diferenças significantes entre as condições pré-e pós-tratamento para os domínios avaliados pelo questionário: dor (P= 0, 00014), rigidez (P= 0, 00015) e função (P= 0, 00015).
Conclusão:
O programa de exercícios de fortalecimento e …
Paulo Marchetti |Alongamento intermitente e contínuo aumentam a amplitude de movimento e reduzem a força dos flexores de punho| Paulo Henrique Marchetti, Viviane de Jesus P Mattos, Érica Paes Serpa, Josinaldo Jarbas da Silva, Enrico Gori Soares, Antonio Claudio Paulodeto, Daniel Alves Correa, Vilela Junior, Guanis de Barros, Willy Andrade Gomes| 2015| Revista Brasileira de Medicina do Esporte| | | | SOC BRASILEIRA MED ESPORTE| Introdução:
A manipulação do intervalo entre séries pode influenciar o desempenho de atividades subsequentes.
Objetivo:
Comparar o efeito do intervalo de alongamento estático de forma continua e intermitente no desempenho de flexores de punho.
Métodos:
A amostra foi composta por 14 adultos jovens, hígidos, do gênero masculino (idade 31±9 anos; estatura 178±0,7 cm; massa 85±12 Kg). Foi avaliada a amplitude de movimento passivo (ADMP) em extensão de punho, a força isométrica máxima de flexão de punho associado a eletromiografia superficial antes e depois de dois protocolos de alongamento com diferentes intervalos entre séries. Para cada sujeito, um dos membros superiores foi alongado com o protocolo contínuo (CON) e o outro com o intermitente (INT), de forma aleatória. O protocolo CON consistiu na realização do alongamento durante 6 minutos ininterruptos, e o INT consistiu na realização de seis séries de 1 minuto por 20 segundos de intervalo entre as séries. A intensidade foi mantida a 70-90% da percepção subjetiva de desconforto.
Resultados:
Os resultados de ADMP mostraram aumento significante entre as condições pré e pós-intervenção, em ambos os protocolos INT (81°±10 e 94°±10, P<0,001) e CON (87°±12 e 96°±11, P=0,004). Os resultados para o pico de força mostraram redução significante nas condições pós-intervenção para ambos os protocolos: INT (205±54 Kgf e 148±56 Kgf, P<0,001) e CON (211±39 Kgf e 144±36 Kgf, P<0,001). Os resultados para a taxa de produção de força mostraram aumento significante nas condições pré e pós-intervenção, para ambos os protocolos INT (0,52±0,29 Kgf …
Paulo Marchetti |Efeitos agudos no desempenho do salto vertical após o agachamento com banda elástica de joelho. (Acute effects on performance of the vertical jump after back squat with knee …| W.A. GOMES, J.J. SILVA, E.G SOARES, E.P. SERPA, D.A. CORREA, G.B. VILELA JUNIOR, C.R. LOPES, P.H. MARCHETTI| 2015| Revista Brasileira de Medicina do Esporte.| 21| 3| 245-248| | 
Paulo Marchetti |Muscle Activation Pattern During Isometric Ab Wheel Rollout Exercise in Different Shoulder Angle-Positions.| P.H. MARCHETTI, B.J. SCHOENFELD, J.J. DA SILVA, M.A. GUISELINI, F.S. DE FREITAS, S.L. PECORARO, W.A. GOMES, C.R. LOPES| 2015| Medical Express| 2| 4| 1-5| | MARCHETTI, Paulo Henrique et al. PADRÃO ISOMÉTRICO DE ATIVAÇÃO MUSCULAR DURANTE O EXERCÍCIO AB WHEEL ROLLOUT EM DIFERENTES POSIÇÕES DO COMPLEXO ARTICULAR DO OMBRO. MedicalExpress (São Paulo, online)[online]. 2015, vol. 2, n. 4, M150404. ISSN 2318-8111. http://dx. doi. org/10.5935/MedicalExpress. 2015.04. 04.
OBJETIVO:
O objetivo do estudo foi investigar o padrão de atividade muscular isométrica de extensores de ombro e estabilizadores de tronco através de eletromiografia de superfície (sEMG) durante diferentes posições do complexo articular do ombro durante o exercício Ab Wheel Rollout.
MÉTODO:
Foram recrutados 8 voluntários jovens e treinados em força, com idade: 25±3 anos, estatura: 178±5 cm, e massa corporal total: 81±2 kg. Os participantes realizaram duas séries de 10 segundos em contração isométrica utilizando o Ab Wheel Rollout, e mantiveram os joelhos apoiados no chão e os braços estendidos. Três posições de ombro (em relação ao tronco) foram avaliadas de forma aleatória entre os participantes: braços posicionados na vertical e alinhado ao eixo do Ab Wheel Rollout (neutra); 90 graus and 150 graus. Um período de cinco minutos de repouso foi respeitado entre posições e tentativas. Os sinais mioelétricos foram medidos para os seguintes músculos: Latíssimo do Dorso; Peitoral Maior; Eretor da Coluna; Reto do Abdome.
RESULTADOS:
Foi observado um aumento significante da atividade muscular isométrica para o músculo Reto do Abdome entre as posições: neutra x 90º, neutra x 150º e 90º x 150º. Houve aumento significante na ativação muscular isométrica do …
Paulo Marchetti |Effect of retrusive displacement of the mandible and increase of the occlusal vertical dimension on mandibular bone density and the masticatory muscles of wistar rats.| C.A.S. CASARIN, D.S. BOCALINI, G.S. LEITE, A.J. SERRA, MARCHETTI. P.H., ANDRADE. E.L., G. ARSA, M.E. PACHECO, P.H.F. CARIA| 2015| Australian Journal of Basic and Applied Sciences| 7| 13| 1-7| | 
Paulo Marchetti |Variáveis objetivas e subjetivas para monitoramento de diferentes ciclos de temporada em jogadores de basquete| Gerson dos Santos Leite, Jonato Prestes, Christiano Bertoldo Urtado, Paulo H Marchetti, Carlos Roberto Padovani, Carlos Roberto Pereira Padovani, Maria Regina Ferreira Brandão, João Paulo Borin| 2012/8/1| Revista Brasileira de Medicina do Esporte| | | | Sociedade Brasileira de Medicina do Exercício e do Esporte| O presente estudo teve o objetivo de avaliar, comparar e relacionar carga e cansaço causado por treinamento durante um ciclo de periodização em jogadores de basquete. Oito atletas profissionais masculinos com idade de 21,9 ± 3,4 anos, todos participantes do Campeonato Paulista de Basquete, divisão especial, foram sujeitos deste estudo. O macrociclo analisado incluiu 19 semanas divididas nos seguintes períodos: preparatório, competitivo I e competitivo II (tendo 4,6 e nove semanas, respectivamente). Os autores avaliaram os atletas diariamente quanto à percepção subjetiva de cansaço e carga de treinamento e monitoraram a potência de membro superior dos atletas através da quantificação de sua capacidade de lançar uma bola medicinal. Os atletas apresentaram menos fadiga (p < 0,005) no período preparatório (13,71 ± 1,30) em comparação com os períodos competitivo I (14,68 ± 1,51) e competitivo II (14,63 ± 1,22). Sua habilidade de lançar a bola medicinal diminuiu (p < 0,005) no período competitivo II (3,59 ± 0,30) em comparação com os períodos preparatório (3,80 ± 0,36) e competitivo I (3,86 ± 0,26). Sua monotonia diminuiu (p < 0,001) no período competitivo II (1,18 ± 0,43) em comparação com o preparatório (2,50 ± 2,01) e competitivo I (2,10 ± 1,61). Os resultados revelaram a efetividade na monitoração da carga e cansaço dos atletas através do método proposto para auxiliar na organização do treinamento durante um macrociclo.
Paulo Marchetti |Acute effect of stretching exercises on upper and lower limbs maximum strength and strength endurance performance| Anderson Caetano Paulo, Carlos Ugrinowitsch, Gerson dos Santos Leite, Gisela Arsa, Paulo Henrique Marchetti, Valmor Tricoli| 2012/6| Motriz: Revista de Educação Física| 18| 2| 345-355| Motriz: revista de educação física (Online)| Este estudo verificou o efeito agudo dos exercícios de flexibilidade estática (EFlex) no desempenho de força máxima (FM) e de resistência de força (RF) em membros inferiores e superiores. Treze voluntários participaram do estudo e foram submetidos a testes de FM e RF (70% 1RM) nos exercícios supino e agachamento precedidos ou não de EFlex. O teste T pareado foi utilizado para comparação das médias nas duas condições. Os EFlex diminuíram a FM no agachamento (141, 2±34, 2 vs 132±34, 9kg; p= 0,007) e no supino (77, 5±21, 7 vs 71, 7±17, 7kg p= 0, 04). A RF no agachamento não sofreu efeito dos EFlex (16, 2±5, 7 vs 16, 3±6, 8 repetições p= 0, 48), porém, no supino a RF apresentou diminuição significante (11, 7±4, 8 vs 9, 9±5, 1 repetições; p= 0,008). Portanto, os EFlex reduziram a FM nos membros inferiores e superiores e a RF somente nos membros superiores. Essa diferença na RF estaria relacionada ao volume de exercícios de flexibilidade pelo tamanho do grupo muscular.
Paulo Marchetti |Técnicas de estimulação neuromuscular para avaliação de déficits de força: uma breve revisão.| Paulo Henrique Marchetti, Simone Dal Corso| 2012| Terapia Manual| 10| 47| 123-8| | Introdução:
Diferentes técnicas de estimulação têm sido utilizadas para quantificar a ativação muscular, e consequente déficits de força. A detecção e quantificação de tais déficits são fundamentais para verificar os mecanismos de fraqueza muscular e facilitar o design e avaliação das subsequentes terapias ou a eficiência dos treinamentos físicos aplicados.
Objetivo:
revisar aspectos técnicos e aplicações das diferentes técnicas de estimulação neuromuscular visando avaliar a força muscular.
Método:
Foi conduzida uma revisão sistemática da literatura utilizando as seguintes
Paulo Marchetti |Desempenho dos membros inferiores após reconstrução do ligamento cruzado anterior| Paulo Henrique Marchetti, Eduardo Garcia Bucchianico, Tatiane Amore, Priscyla Silva Monteiro Nardi, Júlio Cesar Gali, Marco Carlos Uchida| 2012| Motriz rev educ fís| 18| 3| 441-8| | O desempenho dos membros inferiores em tarefas dinâmicas pode auxiliar no entendimento do controle motor em indivíduos submetidos à reconstrução do LCA. Os objetivos do presente estudo foram investigar o déficit bilateral e a simetria entre os membros inferiores de sujeitos submetidos à reconstrução do LCA e comparar com sujeitos não lesionados. Vinte adultos jovens foram divididos em dois grupos (LCA e controle). A tarefa consistiu na execução do exercício Leg Press (unilateral direita e esquerda e bilateral). O número de repetições máximas (RM) foi quantificado e então o déficit bilateral e o índice de assimetria foram calculados. Os resultados mostraram assimetria no número de RM realizada entre membros no grupo LCA (p= 0,005) e apenas o grupo controle apresentou déficit bilateral (p= 0,004). Conclui-se que indivíduos que realizaram a reconstrução do LCA apresentaram assimetrias entre membros, sem a presença de déficit bilateral.
Paulo Marchetti |Balance and lower limb muscle activation between in-line and traditional lunge exercises.| P.H. MARCHETTI, M.A. GUISELINI, J.J. DA SILVA, R. TUCKER, D.G. BEHM, L.E. BROWN| 2018| Journal of Human Kinetics| 62| | 07-20| | In-line and traditional lunge exercises present differences in technique as lower limb positioning (anterioposterior), and medio-lateral (ML) balance may differentially affect primary and stabilizer muscles. The purposes of this study were to examine ML balance and muscle activation in anterior and posterior leg positions between in-line and traditional lunge exercises. Fifteen young, healthy, resistance-trained men (25±5 years) performed 2 different lunge exercises (in-line and traditional) at their 10 repetition maximum in a randomized, counterbalanced fashion. Surface electromyography measured muscle activation of the vastus lateralis, biceps femoris, gluteus maximus, and gluteus medius. ML balance was measured with a Wii Fit Balance Board. The vastus lateralis activity was not significantly different between exercises or leg positions. The biceps femoris activity was not significantly different between exercises …
Paulo Marchetti |Static stretching of the pectoralis major decreases triceps brachii activation during a maximal isometric bench press| Paulo H Marchetti, Rogerio G Reis, Willy A Gomes, Josinaldo J da Silva, Enrico G Soares, Fabio S de Freitas, David G Behm| 2017/12/1| GAZZETTA MEDICA ITALIANA ARCHIVIO PER LE SCIENZE MEDICHE| 176| 12| 659-664| EDIZIONI MINERVA MEDICA| BACKGROUND: Static stretching (SS) not only increases the range of motion (ROM) of the stretched muscle but can also enhance the ROM of homonymous and heteronymous contralateral muscles. Whereas prolonged SS can lead to performance impairments of the stretched muscle, deficits in muscle activation have not been investigated with non-stretched muscles that contribute to a task such as a bench press. The purpose of this study was to examine the effect of prolonged SS of the pectoralis major muscle on the synergic activation of the pectoralis major (PM) and triceps brachii (TB) muscle during an isometric bench press action.
METHODS: Fourteen young, healthy, resistance-trained men had their shoulder complex passively stretched (horizontal abduction) with six stretches of 45-s each, with 15-s rest between each stretch at an intensity of 70-90% of the point of discomfort. The integrated …
Paulo Marchetti |O uso de barra ou haltere não altera a ativação muscular durante o exercício pullover| Yuri de Almeida Costa Campos, Hiago Leandro Rodrigues de Souza, Sandro Fernandes da Silva, Paulo Henrique Marchetti| 2017/9| Revista Brasileira de Medicina do Esporte| 23| 5| 357-360| | CAMPOS, Yuri de Almeida Costa; SOUZA, Hiago Leandro Rodrigues de; SILVA, Sandro Fernandes da and MARCHETTI, Paulo Henrique. EL USO DE LA BARRA O DE PESAS NO ALTERA LA ACTIVACIÓN MUSCULAR DURANTE EL EJERCICIO DE PULLOVER. Rev Bras Med Esporte [online]. 2017, vol. 23, n. 5, pp. 357-360. ISSN 1517-8692. http://dx. doi. org/10.1590/1517-869220172305166571.
Paulo Marchetti |La Respuesta Morfológica y de Rendimiento en el Entrenamiento de Pilates en Mujeres Activas-Ciencias del Ejercicio| Ticiane Marcondes Fonseca da Cruz, Fernando de Oliveira Rosa, Paulo Henrique Marchetti, Natalia Mariana Silva Luna, Thiago Antonio Fedele, Julia Maria D’Andrea Greve, Marcelo Bordalo Rodrigues, Rozangela Verlengia, Charles Ricardo Lopes| 2017| PubliCE| | | | | El propósito de este estudio fue investigar la activación muscular y la fatiga después del entrenamiento de Pilates de alto volumen y las implicaciones agudas en el rendimiento de la fuerza y las respuestas morfológicas relacionadas con el tejido muscular de los miembros inferiores. Doce mujeres jóvenes sanas y entrenadas realizaron una sesión de Pilates con una Silla Wunda. En dos momentos distintos (pre y post-intervención), se registraron las imágenes de resonancia magnética (RM) ponderadas por el tiempo de relajación transversal (T2) y las evaluaciones isocinéticas de las extremidades inferiores. Hubo aumentos significativos en la intensidad de la señal T2 post-intervención en el glúteo mayor y en toda la porción muscular (proximal, medial y distal) del vasto lateral y del recto femoral. Hubo disminuciones significativas en: el rendimiento de pre a post-intervención en el pico de torque, el trabajo total y la potencia media del momento de extensión. Sin embargo, en el momento de la flexión, no hubo diferencias significativas en el rendimiento entre la pre-y la post-intervención. Los resultados confirman que el método Pilates, cuando se aplica con el control de variables tales como series de tiempo, repeticiones e intervalos de descanso, promueve una modificación de la fuerza muscular y el volumen de los grupos musculares afectados. La capacidad de manipular variables de entrenamiento cuando se aplica al aparato de Pilates promueve cambios agudos similares como se informó en estudios de entrenamiento de fuerza.
Paulo Marchetti |Análise qualitativa sobre o conhecimento da pausa de treino durante uma sessão de treinamento de força por profissionais de educação física.| E. SILVA, M.A. MARQUES, M.D. GERMANO, M.A.G. SINDORF, P.H. MARCHETTI, A. EVANGELISTA, C.R. LOPES| 2017| CPAQV Journal| 9| 3| 1-8| | Objetivo:
O objetivo deste trabalho foi identificar através de análise qualitativa o conhecimento sobre a pausa de treino durante uma sessão de treinamento de força em profissionais de educação física atuantes em academias de Hortolândia e região.
Método:
Esta pesquisa possui caráter qualitativo sobre o conhecimento dos avaliados por meio de um questionário de múltipla escolha. O questionário foi respondido por 39 sujeitos, sendo 6 estagiários e 33 professores formados.
Resultados:
ficou evidenciado um baixo nível de conhecimento sobre o assunto por parte dos participantes, sendo que os mesmos atingiram~ 48% de acerto.
Conclusão:
Concluiu-se que os entrevistados apresentaram um nível de domínio do assunto razoavelmente baixo, pois atingiram um valor de~ 48% de acerto nas seis questões.
Paulo Marchetti |EFEITOS AGUDOS E ADAPTAÇÕES NEUROMUSCULARES DECORRENTE DA MANIPULAÇÃO DE VOLUME E DENSIDADE NO TREINAMENTO DE FORÇA| Enrico Gori Soares, Charles Ricardo Lopes, Paulo Henrique Marchetti| 2017| Revista CPAQV–Centro de Pesquisas Avançadas em Qualidade de Vida| Vol| 9| 2| 2| | A manipulação do volume e da densidade no treinamento de força é realizada através do gerenciamento do número de séries realizadas em cada grupamento muscular e como essas séries são alocadas na sessão e na semana de treinamento. A manipulação dessas variáveis altera as respostas agudas e as adaptações crônicas no sistema neuromuscular. Portanto, o objetivo deste trabalho foi revisar os efeitos agudos e adaptações neuromusculares decorrentes da manipulação diária e semanal do volume e densidade no treinamento de força. A combinação da ordem dos exercícios, sistemas de treinamentos e séries realizadas tem demonstrado ser uma estratégia eficiente para aumentar o desempenho e reduzir o tempo da sessão de treinamento. Estudos prévios sugerem que o aumento da sobrecarga pode ser realizado através da manipulação das séries na sessão do treinamento e do número de sessões ao longo da semana. Quanto à frequência de treinamento, a literatura parece ser clara ao sugerir ganhos superiores de força e hipertrofia muscular quando duas a três sessões por grupamento muscular são realizadas na semana. Entretanto, frequências de até 6 sessões na semana para o mesmo grupo muscular podem favorecer o anabolismo muscular. A presente revisão conclui que em uma única sessão de treinamento até 30 séries por grupo muscular podem ser necessárias dependendo do objetivo e da população treinada. O desempenho agudo da sessão (volume absoluto, força e potência) pode ser melhorado por meio de diferentes ordens de exercícios ou sistemas de treinamento quando essas estratégias …
Paulo Marchetti |Efeitos do Kinesio Taping no desempenho de força e na atividade muscular: uma breve revisão| Paulo H Marchetti, Fabio Sisconeto de Freitas| 2016| Revista CPAQV-Centro de Pesquisas Avançadas em Qualidade de Vida-CPAQV Journal| 8| 1| | | A técnica de aplicação do kinesio taping (KT) emprega a aplicação de bandagens elásticas sobre a pele e tem sido cada vez mais utilizada no contexto esportivo e terapêutico. No entanto, os reais mecanismos da possível ação do KT no desempenho ainda não estão totalmente claros. Portanto, o presente estudo objetivou realizar uma breve revisão dos trabalhos científicos sobre os efeitos da técnica do kinesio taping no desempenho de força e na atividade mioelétrica. Foram selecionados, dentre os artigos nacionais e internacionais, aqueles publicados entre os anos de 2004 e 2015. O emprego do KT parece afetar o desempenho de força ou atividade muscular na maioria dos estudos, entretanto, tais resultados observados devem ser considerados de forma cuidadosa, principalmente quanto aos quesitos referentes à técnica de colocação, posição e grau de tração. Outro fator que merece destaque é a …
Paulo Marchetti |Prescrição e periodização do treinamento de força em academias (2a edição revisada e atualizada)| Jonato Prestes, Denis Foschini, Paulo Marchetti, Mario Charro, Ramires Tibana| 2016| | | | | Editora Manole| A segunda edição de Prescrição e periodização do treinamento de força em academias é a versão ampliada e atualizada do best-seller da Editora Manole. A atualização dos capítulos se apoiou em pilares construídos nas mais sólidas e respeitadas publicações científicas, o que se torna evidente no capítulo sobre periodização do treinamento de força, que incorpora as referências científicas mais recentes. Traz também para análise e reflexão a discussão sobre os métodos de treinamento publicados em meios não científicos, suas hipóteses e formas de execução, os quais são apresentados no capítulo sobre montagens e métodos de treinamento de força. A ampliação do livro transcende o incremento de métodos de treinamento e passa pelos capítulos que abordam a fisiologia, a biologia molecular e a prescrição das variáveis do treinamento de força. No primeiro capítulo encontra-se a maior novidade do livro, uma abordagem inovadora de atendimento na musculação fundamentada em teorias da psicologia do coaching para ajudar os clientes no processo de mudança e sustentação de novos hábitos, incluindo a adesão ao exercício físico.
Paulo Marchetti |Efeito dos exercícios regulares no desempenho físico de idosos. (Effect of regular exercises on the physical performance in elderly people).| V. TELES, A.S BLEY, R.A. HUBINGER, F.S. FREITAS, P.H. MARCHETTI| 2016| CPAQV Journal| 8| 3| 1-6| | 
Paulo Marchetti |Discinese Escapular: revisão sobre implicações clínicas, aspectos biomecânicos, avaliação e reabilitação| Andre Serra Bley, Paulo Roberto Garcia Lucarelli, Paulo Henrique Marchetti| 2016| assessment| 8| 2| | | A discinese escapular é caracterizada pelo movimento desequilibrado da escápula durante os movimentos do membro superior, sendo então apontada como um dos fatores predisponentes às lesões no complexo articular do ombro. A presença ou ausência da discinese escapular deve ser determinada durante um exame clínico constituído por inspeção estática e dinâmica da posição escapular e baseada nesta avaliação, a reabilitação inclui exercícios de alongamento e fortalecimento da musculatura escapular. O objetivo deste estudo foi realizar uma revisão sobre as principais características abordadas na literatura sobre a discinese escapular. Foram selecionados os artigos de maior relevância para o objetivo do estudo, entre os anos de 1999 e 2015. A avaliação estática e dinâmica da escápula, apesar de ser baseada num exame qualitativo, é um meio eficiente de identificar as principais alterações biomecânicas da escápula e dessa forma, capaz de auxiliar no estabelecimento dos objetivos de tratamento para esta condição.
Paulo Marchetti |Breve Revisão dos efeitos do treinamento de força com restrição vascular nas adaptações musculares de força e hipertrofia. (Brief review of the blood vascular restriction …| D.A. CORRÊA, G.F. RIZATTO, P.H. MARCHETTI, C.R. LOPES| 2016| CPAQV Journal| 8| 2| 1-9| | 
Paulo Marchetti |INTERMITTENT AND CONTINUOUS STRETCHING INCREASE RANGE OF MOTION AND DECREASE FORCE ON WRIST FLEXORS| Paulo Henrique Marchetti, Viviane de Jesus P Mattos, Érica Paes Serpa, Josinaldo Jarbas da Silva, Enrico Gori Soares, Antonio Claudio Paulodeto, Daniel Alves Correa, Vilela Junior, Guanis de Barros, Willy Andrade Gomes| 2015/12| Revista Brasileira de Medicina do Esporte| 21| 6| 416-420| Sociedade Brasileira de Medicina do Exercício e do Esporte| Objetivo:
Comparar o efeito do intervalo de alongamento estático de forma continua e intermitente no desempenho de flexores de punho.
Métodos
A amostra foi composta por 14 adultos jovens, hígidos, do gênero masculino (idade 31±9 anos; estatura 178±0, 7 cm; massa 85±12 Kg). Foi avaliada a amplitude de movimento passivo (ADMP) em extensão de punho, a força isométrica máxima de flexão de punho associado a eletromiografia superficial antes e depois de dois protocolos de alongamento com diferentes intervalos entre séries. Para cada sujeito, um dos membros superiores foi alongado com o protocolo contínuo (CON) e o outro com o intermitente (INT), de forma aleatória. O protocolo CON consistiu na realização do alongamento durante 6 minutos ininterruptos, e o INT consistiu na realização de seis séries de 1 minuto por 20 segundos de intervalo entre as séries. A intensidade foi mantida a 70-90% da percepção subjetiva de desconforto.
Resultados
Os resultados de ADMP mostraram aumento significante entre as condições pré e pós-intervenção, em ambos os protocolos INT (81±10 e 94±10, P< 0,001) e CON (87±12 e 96±11, P= 0,004). Os resultados para o pico de força mostraram redução significante nas condições pós-intervenção para ambos os protocolos: INT (205±54 Kgf e 148±56 Kgf, P< 0,001) e CON (211±39 Kgf e 144±36 Kgf, P< 0,001). Os resultados para a taxa de produção de força mostraram aumento significante nas condições pré e pós-intervenção, para ambos os protocolos INT (0, 52±0, 29 Kgf/ms e 1, 24±0, 45 Kgf/ms, P< 0,001) e CON (0, 43±0, 29 Kgf/ms e 1, 11±0, 34 Kgf/ms, P< 0,001).
Conclusão
Ambos os …
Paulo Marchetti |Acute effects on performance of the vertical jump after back squat with knee wraps| Willy Andrade Gomes, Josinaldo Jarbas da Silva, Enrico Gori Soares, Erica Paes Serpa, Daniel Alves Corrêa, Vilela Junior, Guanis de Barros, Charles Ricardo Lopes, Paulo Henrique Marchetti| 2015/8| Revista Brasileira de Medicina do Esporte| 21| 4| 257-260| Sociedade Brasileira de Medicina do Exercício e do Esporte| INTRODUCTION:
Knee wraps can affect the muscular performance during high-intensity exercises by reducing muscle activation, which may influence the effect of post-activation potentiation, which depends on high intensity for the following power exercise.
Objective:
To investigate the acute effects on the performance with counter-movement jump (CMJ) after high-intensity squat with and without the use of knee wraps in resistance trained subjects.
METHODS:
The study included 14 men (aged 24±4 years, height: 176±6cm, weight: 81±11kg, 1RM: 107±30kgf) resistance trained (>3 years). Three SCM were performed before and after three back squats at 90% of 1RM with and without the knee wraps. During the CMJ muscle activation (IEMG) of the vastus lateralis (VL) and gluteus maximus (GM), jump time (JT), and impulse (IMP) through the force of vertical ground reaction (FRSV) were evaluated.
RESULTS:
The results show statistically significant differences for JT between post-back-squat conditions (with and without wrap) (P=0.044, TE=1.02), whereas the highest values were observed without knee wrap. For IEMG of VL significant difference between pre and post-conditions after back squat (with knee wrap) (P=0.029, TE=1.68) was observed, and the highest values were observed for the IEMG with knee wrap. No significant differences between conditions were observed for IEMG of GM and IMP.
CONCLUSION:
After using the knee wraps during the squat exercise, there was a reduction in the involvement of the vastus lateralis during the jump with counter-movement, affecting the contact time, but not the production of impulse and consequent …
Paulo Marchetti |Effects of passive stretching protocol on multiple sets performance in resistance training| Charles Ricardo Lopes, Enrico Gori Soares, André Luis Rodrigues Santos, Marcelo Saldanha Aoki, Paulo Henrique Marchetti| 2015/6| Revista Brasileira de Medicina do Esporte| 21| 3| 224-229| Sociedade Brasileira de Medicina do Exercício e do Esporte| OBJETIVO:
Determinar o efeito do alongamento passivo extensivo no desempenho de séries múltiplas e da dor percebida no treinamento de força.
MÉTODOS:
A amostra foi composta de 12 homens experientes com treinamento de força. O protocolo consistiu de três sessões. A primeira serviu como familiarização e determinação de 10 repetições máximas no supino reto (T10RM). A segunda e terceira condições foram aleatorizadas entre os sujeitos, sendo uma realizada com a avaliação do supino reto (SR) sem alongamento prévio (SEMA), e a outra com alongamento prévio (COMA). O protocolo de alongamento consistiu de seis séries de 45 seg de alongamento por 15 seg de intervalo visando o músculo peitoral maior. A intensidade do alongamento foi mantida entre 70 e 90% da percepção subjetiva de desconforto. Antes e após o exercício, a dor local foi avaliada por meio de breve alongamento e palpação. A Análise de Variância ANOVA (2x6) com medidas repetidas foi utilizada para comparar o número de repetições. One-way ANOVA foi utilizada para comparar a carga da primeira série de cada condição (T10RM/SEMA/COMA). O teste-t de Student foi utilizado para comparar a carga total com a dor.
RESULTADOS:
Observou-se decréscimo no número de repetições ao longo das séries em ambas as condições, sem diferenças entre as mesmas, para a carga da primeira série, a carga total e a dor.
CONCLUSÃO:
O número de repetições em séries múltiplas é diminuído na mesma magnitude com e sem a realização do alongamento prévio, além de não alterar a carga total e a dor percebida.
Paulo Marchetti |Efeito do treinamento de força na performance motora de atletas de Triathlon ao longo da temporada esportiva.| Luiz Antonio Domingues Filho, Charles Ricardo Lopes, Alexandre Lopes Evangelista, Gustavo Ribeiro da Mota, Willy Andrade Gomes, Paulo Henrique Marchetti, Ídico Luis. Pelegrinotti| 2015| Revista CPAQV| 7| 2| 1-9| | O objetivo deste estudo foi investigar a influência de um programa de treinamento com pesos na performance motora. Quatorze atletas, do sexo masculino, participantes de competições nacionais de triathlon. O treinamento foi desenvolvido em 24 sessões de treinamento de força durante 12 semanas, sendo que a fase de adaptação (FA) teve duração de 8 sessões, utilizando carga de 60% a 65% de uma repetição máxima (1RM). A fase especifica, constou de 16 sessões e utilizou carga de 65% a 80% de 1RM. A intervenção se deu subdividindo-se os sujeitos em grupo experimental e grupo controle, onde o grupo experimental realizou treinamentos com pesos e o grupo controle não realizou treinamentos de força. Foram realizadas avaliações de performance em três momentos distintos: 1. antes de iniciar o treinamento com pesos, 2. após quatro semanas de treinamento e 3. após doze semanas de …
Paulo Marchetti |Avaliação indireta da força dos músculos do core em iniciantes de academia. (Evaluation of core muscles strength in resistance training beginners).| Marcia Aurora Soriano Reis, Mauro Antonio Guiselini, Priscyla Silva Monteiro Nardi, Guanis de Barros Vilela Junior, Paulo Henrique Marchetti| 2015| Revista Centro de Pesquisas Avançadas em Qualidade de Vida| 7| 1| 1-9| | 
Paulo Marchetti |Avaliação indireta da força dos músculos do core em iniciantes de academia. (Evaluation of core muscles strength in beginners of the resistance training).| M.A.S. REIS, M.A. GUISELINI, P.S.M. NARDI, G.B. VILELA JUNIOR, P.H. MARCHETTI| 2015| Revista CPAQV| 7| 1| 1-9| | 
Paulo Marchetti |Maximum number of repetitions performed by resistance-trained men: Effect of maximum load intensity and exercise selection| Charles R Lopes, Alex H Crisp, Rozangela Verlengia, Cesar A Macarrone, Dyego A Peghim, Gustavo R Mota, Marcelo S Aoki, Paulo H Marchetti| 2014/6| Motriz: Revista de Educação Física| 20| 2| 221-225| Motriz: revista de educação física (Online)| The purpose of this study was to compare the number of maximum repetitions (RMs) performed at 80% of one-repetition maximum (1RM) and 80% of one-repetition maximum eccentric (1RMecc) test for the preacher-curl (PC) and the bench-press (BP) exercises. Fifteen resistance-trained men participated in this counterbalanced-crossover study. There was no significant difference in the number of RMs performed at 80%-1RM (PC: 7.0±1.2 RMs and BP: 5.8±1.3 RMs) and 80%-1RMecc (PC: 6.0±1.1 RMs and BP: 5.4±1.1 RMs) for both exercises. No significant difference in the numbers of RMs was detected between the PC (80%-1RM: 7.0±1.2 RMs and 80%-1RMecc: 6.0±1.1 RMs) and BP exercises (80%-1RM: 5.8±1.3 RMs and 80%-1RMecc: 5.4±1.1 RMs) for both intensities. In conclusion, the number of RMs performed by resistance-trained men was not affected by the maximum load intensity based on muscle action and the exercise selection.
Paulo Marchetti |Os efeitos da suplementação de creatina na performance de corredores velocistas (100 e 200 metros)| Renan Irineu Delafiori de Oliveira, Charles Ricardo Lopes, Murilo Bortolotti Feltrin, Clodoaldo José Dechechi, Gustavo Ribeiro da Mota, Alexandre Lopes Evangelista, Paulo Henrique Marchetti, Antonio Coppi Navarro| 2013/11/2| RBPFEX-Revista Brasileira de Prescrição e Fisiologia do Exercício| 7| 42| | | O uso da creatina enquanto recurso ergogênico para atletas visando o ganho de massa muscular e aprimoramento da performance, vem sendo difundido no meio esportivo. As provas que envolvem força e potência no atletismo (corridas de velocidade, saltos, arremesso e lançamentos) são modalidades onde o uso desse recurso ergogênico é muito requisitado. Diversas pesquisas acerca da suplementação de creatina estão sendo realizadas e por mais que alguns estudos mostrem resultados que apontem para uma efetividade do produto na melhora de capacidades físicas de atletas, principalmente força e potência, outros trabalhos ainda não validam tal método, portanto o presente estudo teve como objetivo comparar os resultados dos testes, de velocidade (30 metros), Sprint de 100 metros e corrida de 40 segundos, realizados por dois grupo de seis atletas de elite nacional (18 a 25 anos) praticantes das provas de corrida de velocidade (100 e 200 metros), submetidos a um mesociclo (3 semanas) de treinamento específico, acompanhado de um programa de suplementação, no qual um grupo realizou a ingestão de creatina, sendo administrada 20g/dia divididos em 4 doses de 5g durante a primeira semana (5 dias), seguido por uma fase de manutenção de 3g/dia na segunda e terceira semana (10 dias). E o outro grupo seguiu o mesmo protocolo de suplementação, porém teve a creatina substituída por placebo. A pesquisa mostrou melhora significativa do grupo creatina na performance dos sprints de 100 metros quando comparado ao grupo placebo. Os testes de velocidade (30 metros) e corrida de 40 segundos não …
Paulo Marchetti |Investigações sobre o controle neuromotor do músculo reto do abdome| Paulo Henrique Marchetti| 2005| | | | | | O músculo reto do abdome é um importante músculo da parede abdominal, responsável pela estabilização e função da coluna, tanto em atividades atléticas quanto em atividades cotidianas. Entretanto, pouco se conhece sobre o controle neuromotor de tal estrutura em atividades voluntárias, como os exercícios abdominais, e como as diferentes tarefas agem na ativação segmentada das porções musculares do músculo reto do abdome. Em geral, a presente dissertação teve como objetivo investigar o controle neuromotor do músculo reto do abdome em diferentes tarefas voluntárias através de quatro experimentos. O primeiro experimento teve como objetivo descrever as características morfológicas do músculo reto do abdome, em particular sua área de secção transversa, ao longo do comprimento longitudinal do músculo, utilizando as imagens do projeto homem visível (NLM). O segundo experimento objetivou o mapeamento dos pontos motores para cada porção muscular. O terceiro experimento investigou o controle neuromotor das diversas porções musculares em tarefas isométricas de baixa intensidade. E por fim, o quarto experimento investigou o comportamento das porções musculares em diferentes tarefas isométricas em condição de fadiga neuromuscular. Baseado nos experimentos apresentados neste estudo pode-se concluir que o músculo reto do abdome é uma estrutura extremamente complexa em sua arquitetura, sendo caracterizada por diversas porções musculares que se interconectam através de aponeuroses tendíneas, onde, possivelmente nenhuma fibra muscular atravesse seus ventres. Devido a tal …
Paulo Marchetti |A amplitude de movimento no agachamento afeta o volume absoluto sem modificar a percepção de esforço. (The range of motion of the back squat exercise affects the absolute …| J.J. DA SILVA, W.A. GOMES, E.G. SOARES, C.R. LOPES, P.H. MARCHETTI| 2019| Brazilian Journal of Kinanthropometry and Human Performance| 1| 1| 1-10| | 
Paulo Marchetti |Posicionamento do tornozelo altera a produção de forca máxima isométrica na mesa flexora. (The ankle position affects the maximal isometric force during the prone curl).| R.A. MAGALHÃES, W.A. GOMES, J.J. DA SILVA, E.G. SOARES, P.H. MARCHETTI| 2019| Brazilian Journal of Exercise Physiology and Prescription| 13| 80| 1-9| | 
Paulo Marchetti |Efeito da intensidade do alongamento na amplitude de movimento do tornozelo e desempenho de salto. (Effect of stretching intensity on range of motion of the ankle joint and …| E.G. SOARES, W.A. GOMES, J.J. DA SILVA, F.I. TEODORO, I.P. PORTO, C.E.E. BACELAR, P.H. GALVÃO, A.A.G. MARCHETTI| 2019| Brazilian Journal of Exercise Physiology and Prescription| 13| 80| 1-12| | 
Paulo Marchetti |Alongamento estático aumenta a amplitude de movimento e não afeta o volume absoluto em uma sessão de treinamento de força para o peitoral e deltoide anterior.| C.R. LOPES, J.J. DA SILVA, S.L. PECORARO, L.O. DE SOUZA, W.A. GOMES, D.A. CORRÊA, E.G. SOARES, MARCHETTI. P.H.| 2019| Revista Brasileira de Ciência e Movimento| 1| 1| 1-10| | 
Paulo Marchetti |Identification of muscle fatigue by tracking facial expressions.| M.C. UCHIDA, R. CARVALHO, V.D. TESSUTI, R.F.P. BACURAU, H.J.C. COELHO JUNIOR, H. RAMOS, M. SANTOS, L.F.M. TEIXEIRA, P.H. MARCHETTI| 2018| PLoS ONE| 13| 12| 1-11| https://doi.org/10.1371/journal.pone.0208834| Resistance training (RT) is performed at distinct levels of intensity from the beginning to the end of exercise sets, increasing the sensation of effort as the exercise progress to more vigorous levels, commonly leading to changes on the facial expression of RT practitioners. The objective of this study is to evaluate changes in facial expressions using the Facial Action Coding System(FACS) and the activation of facial muscles by surface electromyography(sEMG) at two different levels of effort during resistance exercise and to investigate the correlation between facial expression and exercise intensity and fatigue. Eleven healthy male participants [23±6years; 1.77±6 m; 78±10kg] performed a set of arm curl exercise at 50% and 85% 1RM until muscle fatigue. The Surface electromyography (sEMG activity was recorded simultaneously in areas of the epicranius muscle (EM) and zygomatic major muscle (ZM). Facial expression was recorded and blindly scored by five experienced examiners. Scores (0–5) were based on the level of activity of the ZM (lip corner puller—Action Unit 12-FACS) during exercise. Facial expression and sEMG data were obtained during the exercise at the first repetition and at muscle failure. The root mean square (RMS) of the sEMG amplitude of the EM was significantly increased between the first and last repetition (50%1RM:p = 0.002,d = 1.75; and 85%1RM:p = 0.002,d = 1.54). The RMS values for the ZM were significantly increased between the first and last repetition (50%1RM:p<0.001,d = 2.67; 85%1RM:p<0.001,d = 0.50). The RMS values for the ZM were also increased in 85%1RM compared to values obtained from 50 …
Paulo Marchetti |Comparação do desempenho de força em dois modelos de divisão de séries em sujeitos treinados. (Comparison on strength performance on different models of sets organization in …| E.G. SOARES, G.Z. FIORAVANTI, F.A. BRIGATTO, W.A. GOMES, J.J. DA SILVA, F.S. FREITAS, R.A. MAGALHÃES, P.H. MARCHETTI| 2018| Brazilian Journal of Exercise Physiology and Prescription| 12| 80| 1108-1116| | 
Paulo Marchetti |Comparação dos métodos de alongamento ativo estático, passivo estático e ativo dinâmico na flexibilidade de quadril. (Comparison between different methods of stretching …| C.R. LOPES, E.G. SOARES, C.F. VIEIRA, P.H. MARCHETTI| 2018| Brazilian Journal of Exercise Physiology and Prescription| 12| 80| 1117-1123| | 
Paulo Marchetti |The effect of dominant first dorsal interosseous fatigue on the force production of a contralateral homologous and heterologous muscle.| Y Li, K.E. Power, P.H. Marchetti, D.G Behm| 2018| Applied Physiology Nutrition and Metabolism| | | 1-9| | Crossover and non-local muscle fatigue (NLMF) has generally focused on large muscle groups. It is unclear whether fatigue of a small muscle can result in NLMF of a larger muscle. The purpose of the present study was to examine the effect of small muscle (first dorsal interosseous; FDI) fatigue on the force and activation of contralateral homologous and larger heterologous muscles (biceps brachii, BB). Fifteen right-handed, male subjects performed three pre-test index finger abduction or elbow flexion maximum voluntary isometric contractions (MVICs) on the non-dominant side. Subsequently, they performed two 100s index finger abduction MVICs on the dominant side (experimental [fatigue] group) or rested for 5 minutes (control group). Afterwards, a single MVIC and a 12 repetition MVIC fatiguing protocol were completed with index finger abduction or elbow flexion on the non-dominant side. Force and …
Paulo Marchetti |EFEITOS DA BANDA ELÁSTICA NA ATIVIDADE MUSCULAR E NA FORÇA ISOMÉTRICA DOS EXTENSORES DE JOELHO.| F. S. FREITAS, W.A. GOMES, MARCHETTI.| 2018| Revista Brasileira de Medicina do Esporte.| 24| 4| 295-299| | 
Paulo Marchetti |BANDA ELÁSTICA DE COTOVELOS MELHORA DESEMPENHO DO SUPINO RETO EM SUJEITOS TREINADOS.| W.A. GOMES, E.G. SOARES, J.J. DA SILVA, F.S. FREITAS, R.A. MAGALHÃES, C.R. LOPES, P.H. MARCHETTI| 2018| Revista Brasileira de Medicina do Esporte.| 24| 4| 291-294| | 
Paulo Marchetti |Effects of elastic wrap on muscle activation and isometric force of knee extensor.| F. S. FREITAS, W.A. GOMES, MARCHETTI. P.H.| 2018| Revista Brasileira de Medicina do Esporte.| 24| 4| 295-299| | Introduction: The elastic knee wrap (EKW) is a device used by powerlifters, weightlifters and subjects undergoing strength training with the aim of stabilizing the knee joint and increasing the development of strength (carryover effect). Objective: To compare the effects of elastic knee wrap use on muscular activity of the vastus lateralis (VL) and on knee extension force during maximum voluntary isometric contraction (MVIC) on the knee extensor chair. Methods: The study included 18 healthy male strength trained (>1 year) subjects (age: 25.56 ± 4.84 years, total body mass: 81.83 ± 8.73 kg, height: 176 cm ± 5.17). Three five-second maximum voluntary isometric contractions (MVICs) of the knee extensors were performed with a 10-second interval between attempts, for each experimental condition: control (C), with elastic knee wrap (EKW), and with tensor (T). The performance of the knee extensors and VL muscle activity were evaluated. A repeated measures ANOVA was used to compare the dependent variables (carryover, peak force, IEMG and Impulse). Results: For carryover, the use of EKW presented a higher value (74.21%) than the control condition (p <0.001, d = 0.96) and was 79.37% higher than the tensor (p <0.001, d = 0.97). Peak force was 12.2% higher in condition C compared to EKW (p = .018, d = 0.71). For impulse, the control condition presented an increase of 8% compared to EKW use (p = .015, d = 0.62). No significant differences were observed for IEMG. Conclusion: Elastic knee wrap use increased strength production capacity during knee extension. The removal of the mechanical effect originating from carryover during MVIC …
Paulo Marchetti |Elbow wrap improves bench press performance in trained subjects.| W.A. GOMES, E.G. SOARES, J.J. DA SILVA, F.S. FREITAS, R.A. MAGALHÃES, C.R. LOPES, P.H. MARCHETTI| 2018| Revista Brasileira de Medicina do Esporte.| 24| 4| 291-294| | Introduction: The elastic wrap is widely used by different types of athletes and recreational practitioners of strength training in order to improve weightlifting performance. Objective: The objective was to investigate the acute effects of elbow wrap on strength performance, absolute volume, and rating of perceived exertion/discomfort during the bench press (BP) exercise. Methods: The experimental protocol was divided into three laboratory sessions. At the first session, a bench press familiarization phase was performed with (EW) and without (WEW) elastic elbow wrap. During the second session, the 1RM test was carried out in the bench press exercise under both EW and WEW conditions. At the third session, the repetition maximum (RM) test at 70% of 1RM (EW and WEW) was performed until concentric failure. After each session, subjects were consulted about their rate of perceived exertion (RPE), and discomfort (PSD). A paired student t-test was used to compare the values of 1RM and RMs with and without elastic wraps. Descriptive analysis was used for RPE and PSD. Results: For the 1RM test, there was a significant increase for the EW condition when compared to WEW (p<0.05). In the RMs test and absolute volume calculation, there was a significant increase for the EW condition (p<0.05). RPE did not differ in any of the conditions tested (p>0.05). PSD presented a high degree of discomfort with elastic wraps in all conditions. Conclusion: Elastic elbow wraps increase the load lifted in the 1RM test, and the maximum number of repetitions during the BP exercise, and consequently, the absolute volume. The elastic elbow wrap does not alter …
Paulo Marchetti |Different load distributions affect acute neuromuscular responses and muscle thickness in resistance-trained men.| E.S. SOARES, C.R. LOPES, G.Z. FIORAVANTI, F.A. BRIGATTO, W.A. GOMES, J.J. DA SILVA, L.E. BROWN, P.H. MARCHETTI| 2018| International Journal of Sports Science.| 8| 4| 128-135| | The aim of the present study was to compare acute neuromuscular responses and muscle thickness of a resistance training session with continuous-vs. grouped-sets. The experimental procedures were performed across three sessions in a crossover and random fashion. During the first session, all subjects were familiarized and the 10RM load was determined for both exercises: biceps curl (BC) and triceps extension (TE). The following two sessions were randomized for continuous-or grouped-sets. For continuous-sets, 8 sets of 10RM for each exercise (BC and TE) were performed sequentially, while for grouped-sets, each exercise was alternated every 4 sets until 8 sets of 10RM for each exercise were completed. Two minutes of rest was used between sets and exercises. Volume load and muscle thickness (biceps brachii, MTBB, and triceps brachii, MTTB) were measured pre-and post-exercise. Peak force and myoelectric activity (iEMG) were measured for each exercise (BC and TE) and each muscle (biceps brachii and triceps brachii) during a maximal voluntary isometric contraction test. Results demonstrated that volume load was significantly greater in grouped-sets for both exercises (P< 0.001). MTBB and MTTB increased after both sessions (P< 0.001), however, there was a greater effect with continuous-sets when compared to grouped-sets (P= 0.001). Peak force decreased for both exercises and sets (P< 0.05). iEMG decreased only after continuous-sets for both muscles (P< 0.001). In conclusion, continuous-and grouped-sets resulted in specific neuromuscular responses and similar muscle thickness for prime movers. Continuous-sets …
Paulo Marchetti |No effect of Kinesiology Tape on passive tension, strength or muscle activation of quadriceps during maximal voluntary isometric contractions in resistance trained men.| F.S. FREITAS, L.E. BROWN, W.A. GOMES, D.G. BEHM, P.H. MARCHETTI| 2018| International Journal of Sports Physical Therapy| 13| 4| 661-667| | 
Paulo Marchetti |Effect of rest interval length between sets on total load lifted and blood lactate response during total-body resistance exercise session.| C.R. LOPES, A.H. CRISP, B. SCHOENFELD, M.F. RAMOS, M.D. GERMANO, R. VERLENGIA, G.R. DA MOTA, P.H. MARCHETTI, M.S. AOKI| 2018| Asian Journal of Sports Medicine| 9| 4| 1-5| | Objectives: This study aimed to investigate the effect of different rest interval durations between sets during full-body resistance exercise sessions on total load lifted and blood lactate concentrations in resistance-trained individuals. Methods: Ten healthy young men (age: 23±6.5 years; total body mass: 82.8±10.6 kg, height: 177.3±0.1 cm) randomly performed 3 resistance exercise sessions with different rest intervals between sets (30 seconds, 60 seconds and 120 seconds). The resistance exercise sessions consisted of 6 full-body exercises (bench press; seated low row; shoulder press; back squat; leg press 45 and seated calf raise) performed with 4 sets of 10 repetitions maximum (RM). Total load lifted (sets× repetitions× load (Kgf)) and lactate blood concentration were determined for each exercise session. One way, repeated measures analysis of variance (ANOVA) followed by Bonferroni’s post-hoc test were used for multiple comparisons.
Results: The total load lifted was significantly (P< 0.001) lower for 30 seconds (26382.0±4100.3 kg) rest interval compared with 60 seconds (28864.5±4139.7 kg) and 120 seconds (30064.4±3966.4 kg). The blood lactate response was not different among the 3 rest interval conditions investigated, with mean peak values of 7.05±1.69, 7.26±2.77 and 6.90±3.79 mM for 30 seconds, 60 seconds and 120 seconds, respectively.
Conclusions: In conclusion, rest interval durations of 60 seconds and 120 seconds between sets favored a higher total load lifted in the exercise session when compared to the 30 seconds rest interval. The rest protocols implemented in the present study promoted a similar metabolic …
Paulo Marchetti |Different load distributions affect subjective scales and repetitions performed after a single resistance training session in well-trained men.| E.G. SOARES, C.R. LOPES, G.Z. FIORAVANTI, W.A. GOMES, J.J. DA SILVA, F.A. BRIGATTO, L.E. BROWN, P.H MARCHETTI| 2018| CPQ Orthopedics| 1| 3| 1-13| | 
Paulo Marchetti |Prescricao e Periodizacao do Treinamento Personalizado: do iniciante ao avancado| P.H. Marchetti, C.R. Lopes| 2018| | 2| | | | 
Paulo Marchetti |Landing techniques affect performance and mechanical stress during Drop Jump| Paulo Henrique Marchetti, Thaís Tomaz dos Santos, Enrico Gori Soares, Erica Paes Serpa, Josinaldo Jarbas da Silva, Roberto Aparecido Magalhães, Marcelo Massatoshi Senaga Miyatake, Vilela Junior, Guanis de Barros, Willy Andrade Gomes| 2017/5| Revista Brasileira de Medicina do Esporte| 23| 3| 176-179| Sociedade Brasileira de Medicina do Exercício e do Esporte| Introduction: The drop jump is used to improve the power of the lower limbs. Keeping the drop height constant, the variation of the landing technique can modify the performance and the mechanical characteristics of the jump. Objective: To evaluate the effects of different landing techniques on the performance and the reaction force of the vertical component of the ground after drop jump. Methods: Twenty-five healthy and physically active men (age: 26±8 years, total body mass: 75±10 kg, height: 175±10 cm) performed four landing techniques after the drop jump: bounce drop jump (BDJ), drop jump with 90° of knee flexion (DJ90), drop jump with 135° of knee flexion (DJ135), and drop jump with 135° of knee flexion with hands resting on the ground (DJ135A). Three attempts were performed for each technique; the subjects performed the drop jump falling from a 40 cm high force platform. The measures of jump height, contact time and impact were determined by the force of reaction of the vertical component of the ground, measured by the force platform, at a frequency of acquisition of 2,000 Hz. The repeated measures by ANOVA were used to compare the different techniques. Results: The BDJ technique presented lower jump height, shorter contact time and greater impact than the other techniques (P<0.001). The DJ90 technique presented jump height similar to the DJ135 and DJ135A techniques and a short contact time (P<0.001) and a lower impact than the other techniques (P<0.001). Conclusion: The highest jumps were observed for DJ90, DJ135 and DJ135A. The lowest contact time was observed in the BDJ technique, followed by DJ90 …
Paulo Marchetti |Treinamento de força em mulheres menopausadas: Efeitos profiláticos na osteoporose. (Resistance training in menopausal women: Prophylactic effects on Osteoporosis).| C.M.M. DE CARVALHO, A. MARTELLI, MARCHETTI. P.H., J.J. DA SILVA, R.A. MAGALHÃES| 2017| Revista Saúde em foco.| 4| 2| 40-56| | 
Paulo Marchetti |Efeito do Treinamento de Força em Mulheres Menopausadas Portadoras de Osteoporose: uma Breve Revisão/Resistance Training in Menopausal Women: Prophylactic Effects on Osteoporosis| Carla Maria Manoel de Carvalho, Anderson Martelli, Paulo Henrique Marchetti, Josinaldo Jarbas da Silva, Roberto Aparecido Magalhães| 2017| Saúde em Foco| 4| 2| 40-56| | O número de idosos aumenta a cada dia. Na terceira idade, é maior a pré-disposição para as doenças crônicas degenerativas, dentre elas a osteoporose, considerada um problema de saúde mundial. As mulheres são mais suscetíveis a esta doença pois, além de terem menor massa óssea que o homem, quando chegam na fase da menopausa, apresentam maior descalcificação óssea, aumentando o risco de fraturas. Neste sentido, o treinamento de força é um grande aliado na prevenção dessa patologia, proporcionando bem-estar físico e mental, aumento da massa muscular e proteção dos ossos quanto a possíveis lesões e, se associado com algum método farmacológico, auxilia diretamente no tratamento da osteoporose. A presente revisão faz uma abordagem sobre a importância do treinamento de força em mulheres menopausadas e a profilaxia no desenvolvimento da osteoporose, favorecendo uma melhor qualidade de vida. A prática do treinamento de força proporciona à mulher idosa e portadora da osteoporose, maior flexibilidade e mobilidade, permitindo maior independência nas atividades da vida diária.
Paulo Marchetti |Acute neuromuscular and metabolic responses to upper body strength, power, and hypertrophy protocols in resistance trained men.| CORREA. D.A., C.R. LOPES, A.C. PAULODETTO, E.G. SOARES, W.A. GOMES, J.J. DA SILVA, L.E. BROWN, P.H. MARCHETTI| 2017| International Journal of Sport, Exercise and Health Research| 1| 2| 76-80| | 
Paulo Marchetti |Acute effects of maximal isometric muscle action of the elbow extensors on contralateral dynamic task of the elbow flexors: a pilot study| C.V.L.S. TEIXEIRA, D.R. CORTES, A.L. EVANGELISTA, L.T. POLITO, D.S. BOCALINI, P.B. COSTA, R. SIMÃO, P.H. MARCHETTI| 2017| Motriz| 23| 3| 1-5| | Aim the aim was to investigate the influence of a maximal isometric muscle action of the elbow extensors on the contralateral dynamic task of the elbow flexors. Methods Seventeen recreationally trained men (23.3 ± 4.9 yrs, BMI: 24.8 ± 2.2 Kg/m²) underwent two randomized different testing sessions separated by one week. In the control session (CON) all subjects performed a maximum number of repetitions test (RMs) at 75%1RM using the right elbow flexors. The experimental session (EXP) was similar to the CON; however, all subjects were instructed to perform RMs at 75%1RM by using the right elbow flexors and maintaining the maximal voluntary contraction of the left elbow extensors during the test. RMs, rating of perceived exertion (RPE), and training volume (TV) were measured and compared between sessions. Results The EXP showed a significant 10.4% increase on the RMs (13.8 vs. 12.5, p < 0.001, d = 0.44) and 12.1% increase in TV (238.0 vs. 212.4 kg, p < 0.001, d = 0.43) than CON. No differences were observed for RPE between sessions. Conclusion The maximum voluntary contraction of the left elbow extensors increased the RMs of the contralateral elbow flexors, reflecting a higher TV, and no differences in the RPE. Our results suggest that the investigated method may be a viable and practical alternative to increase the acute strength performance of elbow flexors when using submaximal loads.
Paulo Marchetti |Effects of Squat Amplitude On Pelvic Tilt and Tibial Inclination| P.H. MARCHETTI, G.Z. FIORAVANTE, J.J. DA SILVA, W.A. GOMES, E.G. SOARES, S.L. PECORARO, F.S. FREITAS, R.A. MAGALHÃES, M.M.S. MIYATAKE, L.E. BROWN| 2017| MOJ Sports Medicine| 1| 1| 1-3| | Strength training is commonly performed at two different knee flexion amplitudes: partial (to 90 degrees) or total (to 140 degrees). During these amplitudes, both the pelvis and the tibia are moved to ensure control of the center of gravity and displacement of the external overload. Forward or backward movement of the pelvic tilt may indirectly influence the internal load on the spine. Objective: To measure the effect of squat amplitude on pelvictilt and tibia inclination. Eighteen male subjects (age: 26±6 years, height: 178±7 cm, total body mass: 81.3±11 kg, resistance training experience: 5±4 years) were evaluated. Pelvic tilt and tibial inclination were measured by a digital inclinometer (Max Measure, USA, accuracy:±0.02, resolution: 0.05) during isometric squatting at partial and full amplitudes. The digital inclinometer was fixed on the sacrum and on the tibia, with aneutral spine position. A paired student t-test and a significance of 5% were used. There were significant differences in pelvic tilt between partial and full amplitudes (+ 32.4±10.9 and-21.7±12.3, respectively, P< 0.001). Maximum tibial inclination values were not significantly different between partial and total amplitudes (19.1±6.6 and 20.1±7.4, respectively, P= 0.225). It was concluded that the partial squat position produces anterior pelvic tilt while the full squat produces backward pelvic tilt. Inclination of the tibia is similar in both amplitudes of the squat.
Paulo Marchetti |Técnicas de aterrissagem afetam o desempenho e estresse mecânico durante drop jump. (Landing techniques affect the performance and mechanical stress during drop jump).| P.H. MARCHETTI, T.T. DOS SANTOS, E.G. SOARES, E.P. SERPA, J.J. DA SILVA, G.B. VILELA JR., W.A. GOMES| 2017| Revista Brasileira de Medicina do Esporte| 23| 3| 189-192| | 
Paulo Marchetti |Efeitos agudos e adaptações neuromusculares à manipulação de volume e densidade no treinamento de força. (Acute effects and neuromuscular adaptations to manipulation of volume …| E.G. SOARES, C.R. LOPES, P.H. MARCHETTI| 2017| CPAQV Journal| 9| 2| 1-23| | 
Paulo Marchetti |The Morphological and Performance Response of Pilates Training in Active Women| Oliveira Rosa, Paulo Henrique Marchetti, Natalia Mariana, Silva Luna, Thiago Antonio Fedele, Julia Maria D’Andrea, Marcelo Bordalo Rodrigues Greve, Rozangela Verlengia, Charles Ricardo Lopes| 2016/12| | | | | | Cruz TMF, Rosa FO, Marchetti PH, Luna NMS, Fedele TA, Greve JMA, Rodrigues MB, Verlengia R, Lopes CR. The Morphological and Performance Response of Pilates Training in Active Women. JEPonline 2016; 19 (6): 52-63. The purpose of this study was to investigate the muscle activation and fatigue post high volume Pilates training and the acute implications on the strength performance and morphological responses related to muscle tissue of lower limb. Twelve healthy young trained women performed one session of Pilates using a Wunda Chair. In two distinct moments (preand post-intervention), transverse relaxation time (T2)-weighted magnetic resonance (MR) images and isokinetic test evaluations of the lower limbs were recorded. There were significant increases in T2 signal intensity post-intervention for the gluteus maximus and throughout the muscle portion (proximal, medial, and distal) of the vastus lateralis and rectus femoris. There were significant decreases in performance from pre-to post-intervention in peak torque, total work, and average power of the extension moment. However, in the
Paulo Marchetti |Alongamento estático monoarticular aumenta a amplitude de movimento e altera o sinergismo muscular durante o exercício leg press isométrico unilateral.| P.H. MARCHETTI, W.A. GOMES, E.P. SERPA, P.S.M NARDI, A.S. BLEY, S. DAL CORSO| 2016| Revista Brasileira de Pesquisa em Ciências da Saúde| 3| 2| 44-51| | Devido ao sincronismo muscular necessário para a execução de um exercício multiarticular como o leg press, o alongamento estático agudo monoarticular poderia produzir alterações no controle articular individual afetando, desta forma, o controle dos músculos primários em outras articulações visando manter a ação isométrica. Assim, o presente estudo avaliou o efeito agudo de um protocolo de alongamento estático monoarticular no sinergismo muscular durante a execução do exercício leg press unilateral (LPU) isométrico. A amostra foi composta por 15 sujeitos adultos, hígidos, do sexo masculino (idade: 25±4 anos, estatura: 174±8 cm, massa corporal total: 71±6 kg, e 2±1 ano de experiência em musculação). O sinal eletromiográfico advindo dos músculos vasto lateral (VL) e glúteo máximo (GM) foram mensurados durante uma ação isométrica de 10" no exercício LPU contra 60% 1RM em três condições de alongamento estático monoarticular (6 séries de 45”/15” e 70-90% da percepção subjetiva de desconforto): sem alongamento, alongamento do joelho (CAQ) e alongamento de quadril (CAG). Uma ANOVA (2x2) foi utilizada para verificar as diferenças entre condições (CAQ e CAG) e músculos (VL e GM) para as variáveis dependentes: eletromiografia integrada (IEMG) e frequencia mediana (FMed). Houve aumento da amplitude máxima passiva para articulação do quadril e do joelho (P< 0,001). Os resultados da IEMG revelaram diferenças significantes entre as condições CAQ e CAG para o músculo vasto lateral (P= 0,004; d= 1, 22;∆%= 12, 1%) e glúteo máximo (P= 0,024; d= 1, 44;∆%= 35, 5). Foi observada diferença significante …
Paulo Marchetti |The Morphological and Performance Response of Pilates Training in Active Women| Lopes CR. Cruz TMF, Rosa FO, Marchetti PH, Luna NMS, Fedele TA, Greve JMA, Rodrigues MB, Verlengia R| 2016| JEPonline| 19| 6| 52-63| | 
Paulo Marchetti |Aspectos metodológicos do treinamento de força na promoção da qualidade de vida e saúde| P.H. Marchetti| 2016| | 2| | 155-163| Editorial Universidade da Inteligência| 
Paulo Marchetti |The morphological and performance response of Pilates Training in active women.| T. CRUZ, F. ROSA, P.H. MARCHETTI, N. LUNA, T. FEDELE, J.M. D'GREVE, M. RODRIGUES, R. VERLENGIA, C.R. LOPES| 2016| Journal of Exercise Physiology Online| 19| 6| 52-63| | Cruz TMF, Rosa FO, Marchetti PH, Luna NMS, Fedele TA, Greve JMA, Rodrigues MB, Verlengia R, Lopes CR. The
Morphological and Performance Response of Pilates Training in Active Women. JEPonline 2016; 19 (6): 52-63. The purpose of this study was to investigate the muscle activation and fatigue post high volume Pilates training and the acute implications on the strength performance and morphological responses related to muscle tissue of lower limb. Twelve healthy young trained women performed one session of Pilates using a Wunda Chair. In two distinct moments (preand post-intervention), transverse relaxation time (T2)-weighted magnetic resonance (MR) images and isokinetic test evaluations of the lower limbs were recorded. There were significant increases in T2 signal intensity post-intervention for the gluteus maximus and throughout the muscle portion (proximal, medial, and distal) of the vastus lateralis and rectus femoris. There were significant decreases in performance from pre-to post-intervention in peak torque, total work, and average power of the extension moment. However, in the
Paulo Marchetti |PERFIL ANTROPOMÉTRICO E FUNCIONAL DOS VELEJADORES NO CAMPEONATO BRASILEIRO DE VELA ADAPTADA| Fábio Barreto Maia da Silva, Leandro Mendes da Silveira, Débora Ávila Barbosa, Roger Gomes Tavares Mello, Charles Ricardo Lopes, Paulo Henrique Marchetti| 2016| Revista CPAQV–Centro de Pesquisas Avançadas em Qualidade de Vida| Vol| 8| 2| 2| | Objetivo:
Descrever o perfil antropométrico e funcional dos velejadores que participaram do Campeonato Brasileiro de Vela Adaptada.
Métodos:
Participaram 19 atletas de vela adaptada, do sexo masculino, com idade entre 23 e 56 anos. Todos os dados dos participantes do campeonato foram descritos com as seguintes medidas antropométricas de peso corporal, estatura, estatura sentada, comprimento e alcance dos membros superiores e inferiores, diâmetros ósseos, circunferências, dobras cutâneas e funcional da força de preensão manual.
Resultados:
Em função de a literatura científica ser escassa quanto ao perfil antropométrico e funcional dos velejadores da vela adaptada nas classes 2.4 mR tripulado por um atleta e o J24 tripulado por três, tornou-se impossível comparar os resultados obtidos neste estudo, em todas variáveis antropométricas e funcional.
Conclusões:
Esse perfil apresentado será utilizado em estudos futuros com um numero maior de variáveis e avaliação de desempenho em condição especifica da modalidade, com o objetivo de aprofundar as características físicas e funcionais ideais desses atletas.
Paulo Marchetti |EFEITOS DO KINESIO TAPING NO DESEMPENHO DE FORÇA E NA ATIVIDADE MUSCULAR: UMA BREVE REVISÃO| Fábio Sisconeto de Freitas, Paulo Henrique Marchetti| 2016| Revista CPAQV–Centro de Pesquisas Avançadas em Qualidade de Vida| Vol| 8| 1| 2| | A técnica de aplicação do kinesio taping (KT) emprega a aplicação de bandagens elásticas sobre a pele e tem sido cada vez mais utilizada no contexto esportivo e terapêutico. No entanto, os reais mecanismos da possível ação do KT no desempenho ainda não estão totalmente claros. Portanto, o presente estudo objetivou realizar uma breve revisão dos trabalhos científicos sobre os efeitos da técnica do kinesio taping no desempenho de força e na atividade mioelétrica. Foram selecionados, dentre os artigos nacionais e internacionais, aqueles publicados entre os anos de 2004 e 2015. O emprego do KT parece afetar o desempenho de força ou atividade muscular na maioria dos estudos, entretanto, tais resultados observados devem ser considerados de forma cuidadosa, principalmente quanto aos quesitos referentes à técnica de colocação, posição e grau de tração. Outro fator que merece destaque é a diferença metodológica encontrada entre os estudos como a utilização de grupo controle e placebo, o poder dos estudos (baseado principalmente em um número pequeno de sujeitos avaliados), além da análise do efeito do tamanho; e desta forma, resultando em complicações na interpretação e comparação dos resultados.
Paulo Marchetti |Perfil antropométrico e funcional dos velejadores no campeonato brasileiro de vela adaptada. (Anthropometric and functional profile of the sailors in the Brazilian championship …| F.B.M. SILVA, L.M. SILVEIRA, D.A. BARBOSA, R.G.T. MELLO, C.R. LOPES, P.H. MARCHETTI| 2016| CPAQV Journal| 8| 2| 1-7| | 
Paulo Marchetti |Efeitos do treinamento de força e flexibilidade em pacientes com osteoartrite de joelho. (Effects of resistance training and stretching in patients with knee osteoarthritis).| A.S. BLEY, J.N. MEDRADO, C.A.N. SANTIAGO, N.B. NUNES, R.A. HUBINGER, P.H. MARCHETTI| 2016| CPAQV Journal| 8| 2| 1-11| | 
Paulo Marchetti |Discinese escapular: revisão sobre implicações clínicas, aspectos biomecânicos, avaliação e reabilitação. (Scapular dyskinesis: a review of clinical implications, biomechanical …| A.S. BLEY, P.R.G. LUCARELLI, P.H. MARCHETTI| 2016| CPAQV Journal| 8| 2| 1-10| | 
Paulo Marchetti |Efeitos do Kinesio Taping no desempenho de força e na atividade muscular: uma breve revisão (Effects of Kinesio Taping on strength performance and muscle activity: a brief review).| F.S. FREITAS, P.H. MARCHETTI| 2016| CPAQV Journal.| 8| 1| 1-21| | 
Paulo Marchetti |David George Behm, Tyler Cavanaugh, Patrick Quigley, Jonathan Christopher Reid, Priscyla Silva Monteiro Nardi &| Paulo Henrique Marchetti| 2016| Eur J Appl Physiol| 116| | 241-249| | Results There were significant shoulder ROM increases following lower body SS (P< 0.010,∆%= 8.2%) and DS (P< 0.019,∆%= 9%). There was a significant hip flexor ROM (P< 0.016,∆%= 5.2%) increase following upper body SS. There were no significant main effects or interactions for dynamic ROM or muscle force and activation variables.
Paulo Marchetti |Perfil antropométrico e funcional na vela adaptada| FB Maia da Silva, DA Barbosa, LM Silveira, RGT Mello, PH Marchetti, CR Lopes| 2015/10/1| Motricidade| 11| 4| 169| Edições Desafio Singular| A ginástica rítmica (GR) é uma modalidade que demanda níveis altos das manifestações das capacidades coordenativas, buscando a coesão entre graciosidade e precisão de movimentos. Pretendemos avaliar a eficácia do treinamento específico de precisão e sua influência nas capacidades coordenativas em atletas de GR. Realizámos uma pesquisa de campo experimental, na qual participaram 30 atletas (n= 15 controle; n= 15 experimental) da categoria juvenil, da cidade de Fortaleza/CE. As atletas realizaram cinco pré-testes específicos descritos em Karpenko e Rumba (2012), posteriormente foram submetidas a seis meses de treinamento específico de precisão e ao final realizou-se pós-teste. Para calcular as diferenças dos resultados utilizou-se o teste de Mann-Withney.
Paulo Marchetti |Alongamento estático intermitente e contínuo aumentam a amplitude de movimento e reduzem a força dos flexores de punho. (Intermittent and continuous stretching increase range …| MARCHETTI. P.H., V.J.P MATTOS, E.P. SERPA, J.J. DA SILVA, E.G. SOARES, A.C. PAULODETO, D.A CORREA, G.B. VILELA JUNIOR, W.A. GOMES| 2015| Revista Brasileira de Medicina do Esporte| 21| 6| 416-420| | 
Paulo Marchetti |A angulação de joelhos altera a atividade mioelétrica dos ísquiotibiais durante o exercício Stiff (Hamstring muscle activation can be affected by the knee joint position during …| Enrico Gori Soares, Willy Andrade Gomes, Josinaldo Jarbas Da Silva, Fábio Sisconeto De Freitas, Mauro Antonio Guiselini, Silvio Luiz Pecoraro, Gustavo Zorzi Fioravanti, Rogério Grigolon Reis, Paulo Henrique Marchetti| 2015| | | | | | 
Paulo Marchetti |O tamanho do músculo pode influenciar o treino de musculação?| Paulo H. Marchetti| 2015| | | | | | 
Paulo Marchetti |Effect of strength training on the motor performance of the triathlon athletes during the season| Luiz Antonio Domingues Filho, Charles Ricardo Lopes, Alexandre Lopes Evangelista, Gustavo Ribeiro da Mota, Willy Andrade Gomes, Paulo Henrique Marchetti, Ídico Luis Pelegrinotti| 2015| Revista CPAQV–Centro de Pesquisas Avançadas em Qualidade de Vida| Vol| 7| 2| 2| | The objective of this study was to investigate the influence of a strength training program on physical performance. Fourteen athletes, male, participants from national competitions of triathlon. The training was developed in 24 sessions of resistance training for 12 weeks, and adaptation phase lasted 08 sessions, using 60% to 65% of one repetition maximum. The specific phase consisted of 16 sessions using 65% to 80% of 1RM. Subjects were subdivided in the experimental group and control group, where experimental group has conducted strength training and the control group did not. Performance evaluations were carried out in three different moments: 1. before starting the strength training, 2. after four weeks of strength training and 3. after 12 weeks of resistance training. We used a repeated measures ANOVA (2 x) to the% Fat, lean body mass, swimming test of 400m, maximum oxygen consumption, maximum power, mean power, index of fatigue with Sidak’s post hoc, and 5% of significance. We concluded that the strength training influenced positively the time of 400 m of the swimming, the maximum power and the average of the power in triathletes after a periodized training program for 12 weeks.
Paulo Marchetti |Different warm-ups on the maximum repetition performance in resistance training| Danilo Atanázio da Luz Junior, Aylton Figueira Junor, Érica Paes Serpa, Willy Andrade Gomes, Enrico Gori Soares, Charles Ricardo Lopes, Luis Felipe Milano Teixeira, Paulo Henrique Marchetti| 2014/12| Revista Brasileira de Medicina do Esporte| 20| 6| 461-464| Sociedade Brasileira de Medicina do Exercício e do Esporte| Objetivo:
Avaliar o efeito de diferentes estratégias de aquecimento no desempenho neuromuscular em adultos jovens submetidos a testes de repetições máximas de membro superior e inferior.
Métodos:
Dois experimentos foram realizados separadamente. Para o primeiro experimento, 16 adultos jovens hígidos realizaram um teste de repetições máximas a 70% de 1RM no supino reto (previamente determinado). Quatro condições de aquecimento foram testadas: Controle (CON) sem aquecimento prévio, esteira (EST) 5'a 60% VO 2max, resistência de força (REF) 15 repetições com 40% de 1RM e força máxima (FM) duas séries de duas repetições com 90% de 1RM. Para o segundo experimento, 14 adultos jovens hígidos, realizaram um teste de repetições máximas a 70% de 1RM no leg press unilateral (previamente determinado). Cinco condições de aquecimento foram testadas: controle (CON) sem aquecimento prévio, esteira (EST) 5'a 60% VO 2max, bicicleta (BIC) 5'a 60% VO 2max, resistência de força (REF) 15 repetições com 40% de 1RM e força máxima (FM) duas séries de duas repetições com 90% de 1RM. Para ambos os experimentos o número de repetições realizadas e a percepção subjetiva de esforço foram avaliadas.
Resultados:
Para o primeiro experimento o protocolo FM foi superior a todos os outros protocolos. Não foram observadas diferenças entre as outras condições. Para o segundo experimento, foi observado diferenças entre todos os protocolos, exceto CON e EST. Sendo FM> BIC> REF> EST= CON.
Conclusão:
Os resultados do presente estudo sugerem que um aquecimento de força máxima levou a uma maior …
Paulo Marchetti |The effect of different stretching times on single-leg jump performance| Paulo Henrique Marchetti, Enrico Gori Soares, Fernando Henrique Domingues Oliveira Silva, Iris Ilza de Medeiros, Ilídio dos Reis Neto, Charles Ricardo Lopes, Marco Carlos Uchida, Reury Frank Bacurau| 2014/6| Revista Brasileira de Medicina do Esporte| 20| 3| 223-236| Sociedade Brasileira de Medicina do Exercício e do Esporte| INTRODUCTION:
Stretching is very common as part of the warm-up in several sports modalities. However this practice can be negative to strength improvement and muscular power. Consequently, jump performance can be reduced after stretching exercises, depending on its duration and intensity.
OBJECTIVE:
To evaluate the acute effects of different long-term stretching times on single-leg drop jump performance.
METHODS:
The sample was composed of 16 healthy jump experienced young adult athletes. The experimental protocol consisted of performing three maximum unipodal drop jumps from a 15 cm high platform, and landing on a contact mat (Hidrofit(r)), before and after two stretching times of the triceps surae muscles (i.e. a series of 3 minutes on one side and 6 minutes on the other, with the sides being randomly chosen), using an intensity of 70-90% of their subjective perception of discomfort. An ANOVA (2x2) analysis was used to verify differences for the jump height, contact time and flexibility, using a significance level of 5%.
RESULTS:
The results showed significant differences between pre and post-stretching times of 3 and 6 minutes (P=0.002 and P=0.001, respectively). Contact time was higher only for the stretching time of 6 minutes (P=0.039).
CONCLUSION:
We conclude that stretching exercises of the triceps surae muscle, for 3 or 6 minutes, resulted in a decreased performance in the single-leg drop jump, a decrease in the vertical jump height (for 3 and 6 minutes) and contact time (for 6 minutes only), reinforcing the need for more debates in this area regarding stretching before power activities.
Paulo Marchetti |Propulsion Phase of the Single Leg Triple Hop Test in Women with| AS Bley, JCF Correa, ACD Reis, NDDA Rabelo, PH Marchetti| 2014| | | | | | Asymmetry in the alignment of the lower limbs during weight-bearing activities is associated with patellofemoral pain syndrome (PFPS), caused by an increase in patellofemoral (PF) joint stress. High neuromuscular demands are placed on the lower limb during the propulsion phase of the single leg triple hop test (SLTHT), which may influence biomechanical behavior. The aim of the present cross-sectional study was to compare kinematic, kinetic and muscle activity in the trunk and lower limb during propulsion in the SLTHT using women with PFPS and pain free controls. The following measurements were made using 20 women with PFPS and 20 controls during propulsion in the SLTHT: kinematics of the trunk, pelvis, hip, and knee; kinetics of the hip, knee and ankle; and muscle activation of the gluteus maximus (GM), gluteus medius (GMed), biceps femoris (BF) and vastus lateralis (VL). Differences between groups were calculated using three separate sets of multivariate analysis of variance for kinematics, kinetics, and electromyographic data. Women with PFPS exhibited ipsilateral trunk lean; greater trunk flexion; greater contralateral pelvic drop; greater hip adduction and internal rotation; greater ankle pronation; greater internal hip abductor and ankle supinator moments; lower internal hip, knee and ankle extensor moments; and greater GM, GMed, BL, and VL muscle activity. The results of the present study are related to abnormal movement patterns in women with PFPS. We speculated that these findings constitute strategies to control a deficient dynamic alignment of the trunk and lower limb and to avoid PF pain. However, the greater BF …
Paulo Marchetti |BREVE REVISÃO DOS ASPECTOS CINESIOLÓGICOS DO EXERCÍCIO REMADA| Enrico Gori Soares, Tulio Cesar Rodrigues da Silva, Pamella Ferraz de Paula Cardoso, Andre Serra Bley, Paulo Henrique Marchetti| 2014| Revista CPAQV-Centro de Pesquisas Avançadas em Qualidade de Vida-CPAQV Journal| 6| 3| | | Um exercício comumente utilizado por praticantes do treinamento de força a fim de desenvolver os músculos dorsais e flexores do cotovelo é o exercício remada. Diversas variações em sua execução são propostas a fim de alterar as exigências da musculatura alvo. Portanto o objetivo do presente estudo foi realizar uma breve revisão da literatura científica sobre aspectos anatômicos, cinesiológicos e biomecânicos do exercício remada e suas variações. Os principais músculos envolvidos são: braquirradial, braquial, bíceps braquial, deltóide posterior, latíssimo do dorso, redondo (maior/menor), trapézio, rombóides, subescapular e infraespinal. As principais alterações em sua realização estão relacionadas à execução da adução/abdução da escápula onde não foram observadas diferenças na atividade dos músculos envolvidos. Quanto ao ângulo de abdução da articulação glenoumeral (enfatizando a flexão …
Paulo Marchetti |Relation between Wearing High-Heeled Shoes and Gastrocnemius and Erector Spine Muscle Action and Lumbar Lordosis.| Cezar Casarin, Danilo S. Bocalini, P.H. Marchetti, Andrade Erinaldo L., Gerson S. Leite, Andrey J. Serra, Frank S. Suzuki, Paulo H.F. Caria| 2014| Medical Science and Tecnology| 55| | 71-76| | 
Paulo Marchetti |Diferentes aquecimentos no desempenho de repetições máximas na musculação. (Different warm-ups on the maximum repetition performance in resistance training).| Danilo Atanázio da Luz, Aylton Figueira Jr, Erica Paes Serpa, Willy Andrade Gomes, Enrico Gori Soares, Charles Ricardo Lopes, Luis Felipe M. Teixeira, Paulo Henrique Marchetti| 2014| Revista Brasileira de Medicina do Esporte| 20| 6| 463-466| | 
Paulo Marchetti |Breve Revisão dos Aspectos Cinesiológicos do Exercício Remada (Brief review of the kinesiological aspects of the row exercises)| Enrico Gori Soares, Tulio Cesar Rodrigues Silva, Pamella Ferraz de Paula Cardoso, Andre Serra Bley, Paulo Henrique Marchetti| 2014| Revista CPAQV| 6| 3| 1-10| | 
Paulo Marchetti |Reprodutibilidade no uso do esfigmomanômetro para avaliação da força muscular dos rotadores mediais e laterais do ombro.| A.S. Bley, R.B. Silva, A.C. Reis, N.D.A. Rabelo, P.H. Marchetti, Lucareli P. R.G.| 2014| Revista Pulsar| 6| 3| 1-9| | 
Paulo Marchetti |Prescrição e Periodização do Treinamento Personalizado: do iniciante ao avançado| Paulo Henrique Marchetti, Charles Ricardo Lopes| 2014| | 1| | 120| Mundo| 
Paulo Marchetti |The effects of creatine supplementation on performance runners--100 and 200 meters/Os efeitos da suplementacao de creatina na performance de corredores velocistas--100 e 200 metros| Renan Irineu Delafiori de Oliveira, Charles Ricardo Lopes, Murilo Bortolotti Feltrin, Clodoaldo Jose Dechechi, Gustavo Ribeiro da Mota, Alexandre Lopes Evangelista, Paulo Henrique Marchetti, Antonio Coppi Navarro| 2013/11/1| Revista Brasileira de Prescrição e Fisiologia do Exercício| 7| 42| 540-548| Instituto Brasileiro de Pesquisa e Ensino em Fisiologia do Exercicio. IBPEFEX| The use of creatine as an ergogenic resource for athletes aiming to gain muscle mass, and improve performance, has been widespread in sports. The tests that involve strength and power in athletics (sprinting, jumping, throwing and releases) are modalities where the use of ergogenic resource is in much demand. Several studies on creatine supplementation are being held and however that some studies show results that indicate a product's effectiveness in improving physical abilities of athletes, mainly strength and power, other studies have not validate this method, therefore the present study aimed to compare the test results, speed (30 meters), Sprint 100 meters and running 40 seconds, performed by two groups of six athletes (18 to 25 years) practitioners of tests sprint (100 and 200 meters), subjected to a mesocycle (3 weeks) specific training, accompanied by a supplementary program, in which a group held …
Paulo Marchetti |Acute effects of light-emitting diodes on muscle fatigue during isometric exercise in patients with COPD: A pilot study| Eduardo Foschini Miranda, Paulo Henrique Marchetti, Ernesto Cesar Pinto Leal Junior, Simone Dal Corso| 2012/9/1| | 40| Suppl 56| P620| European Respiratory Society| Background:
Patients with chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD) are susceptible to early muscle fatigue. Light-emitting diodes (LEDs) have been used to minimize muscle fatigue in athletes and healthy subjects.
Aim:
To investigate the acute effects of LEDs on muscle fatigue and perception of effort in patients with COPD during isometric endurance test of the quadriceps femoris (QF).
Methods:
Ten patients (VEF1 50 ± 13% of predicted) underwent a single LED and placebo (PL) application, 48 h apart, in a randomized, cross-over design. The LED and PL were applied in three localized areas of the QF (rectus femoris, vastus lateralis, and vastus medialis). Before and after exposure to LED and PL, patients performed an isometric endurance test (80% of the maximum voluntary isometric contraction) until the limit of tolerance concomitant to surface electromyography recording (median frequency as mean …
Paulo Marchetti |Rectus Abdominis Muscle Activation During Low-Intensity And Fatiguing Tasks| Paulo H Marchetti, Andre F Kohn, Marcos Duarte| 2012/7/1| | 27| | 495-495| SPRINGER| 
Paulo Marchetti |COMPARAÇÃO DA DEMANDA CARDIORRESPIRATÓRIA E DA ATIVIDADE ELETROMIOGRAFIA DO VASTO LATERAL NO TESTE DE DEGRAU DE CHESTER EM INDIVÍDUOS SAUDÁVEIS| Jaksoel Cunha Silva, Tatiane Soares Amaral, Priscyla SM Nardi, Fernanda C Lanza, Paulo Henrique Marchetti, Simone D Corso| 2012| Brazilian Journal of Physical Therapy| 16| Suppl.| 182-182| UFSCar| O degrau vem sendo utilizado como ergômetro tanto para avaliação da capacidade física quanto treinamento físico. É desconhecido se a demanda cardiorrespiratória difere conforme a utilização dos membros inferiores (MMII) durante o teste.
Objetivo:
Comparar a demanda cardiorrespiratória e atividade eletromiografica do vasto lateral (VL) na atividade fixa (AF) e alternada (AA) de MMII durante o teste do degrau de Chester (TDC).
Método:
Quinze indivíduos saudáveis (22±2 anos, 6 mulheres) realizaram, em ordem randomizada, um TDC sempre com o membro inferior direito iniciando a subida e descida (AF) e, em outro dia, o TDC alternando o membro inferior em cada estágio do teste (AA).
Resultados:
O tempo de realização do TDC com AA foi superior ao da AF (8, 4±1, 2 min vs 7, 9±1, 1 min; p= 0,002), determinando maior VCO2 (2, 9±0, 9 L vs 2, 7±0, 8 L, p= 0,012) e ventilação (85, 4±27, 4 L vs 78, 1±20 …
Paulo Marchetti |Síndrome de Hutchinson-Gilford Progéria e o benefício da interveção fisioterapêutica: uma revisão da literatura internacional.| Mariane Braga da Silva, Gizele Fontana Costalonga, Hélio Gustavo Santos| 2012| Manual Therapy, Posturology & Rehabilitation Journal| 10| 47| | | Introdução:
Diferentes técnicas de estimulação têm sido utilizadas para quantificar a ativação muscular, e consequente déficits de força. A detecção e quantificação de tais déficits são fundamentais para verificar os mecanismos de fraqueza muscular e facilitar o design e avaliação das subsequentes terapias ou a eficiência dos treinamentos físicos aplicados.
Objetivo:
revisar aspectos técnicos e aplicações das diferentes técnicas de estimulação neuromuscular visando avaliar a força muscular.
Método:
Foi conduzida uma revisão sistemática da literatura utilizando as seguintes
Paulo Marchetti |Upper and lower limbs muscle in patients with COPD: Similar muscle efficiency but differences in resistance to fatigue| Eduardo Foschini Miranda, Carla Malaguti, Paulo Marchetti, Simone Dal Corso| 2011/9/1| | 38| Suppl 55| p1256| European Respiratory Society| Background: It is still controversy whether the impairment of muscle function is homogeneous between the upper and lower limbs in patients with COPD.
Objective: To compare muscle function between quadriceps femoris (QF) and middle deltoid (MD) after a fatigue protocol and also the recovery time fatigue.
Methods: Twenty-one patients (VEF1: 46±10% predicted) performed for both muscles: maximum voluntary isometric contraction (MVIC) pre and post 10, 30, 60min and 24h after completing an isometric endurance test (IET, 60%MVIC). All measurements were made with surface electromyograpy (sEMG) recording. For the temporal analysis the amplitude of the sEMG signals was expressed as root mean square (RMS, 1-s moving window), normalized by MVIC and then, the RMS EMG was integrated (iEMG). For the time-frequency analysis, EMG data were analyzed with a FFT applied to 1-s epochs and the …
Paulo Marchetti |Activación Selectiva del Músculo Recto Abdominal Durante las Tareas Fatigantes y de Baja Intensidad| Paulo H Marchetti, André F Kohn, Marcos Duarte| 2011/7/24| PubliCE Standard| | | | | Para comprender la potencial activación selectiva del músculo recto abdominal, se han llevado a cabo dos experimentos. En el primero, los participantes realizaron dos ejercicios isométricos controlados: elevación del tronco (elevación del tronco en posición supina) y elevación de piernas (elevación de las piernas flexionadas en posición supina) a baja intensidad (en la que solo se reclutan unas pocas unidades motoras). En el segundo experimento, los participantes realizaron los mismos ejercicios, pero se les pidió que mantuvieran un cierto nivel de fuerza para inducir a la fatiga. Se registró la actividad electromiográfica (EMG) de las porciones inferior y superior del músculo recto abdominal durante los ejercicios y se utilizaron análisis espacio-temporales y de frecuencia para describir los patrones de activación muscular. En las contracciones de baja intensidad, el índice entre las intensidades de EMG de …
Paulo Marchetti |Training Cadence: New Insight Into Boxing Training| Luis Felipe Milano Teixeira, De Godoi, Vladimir Juliano, Arnaldo Beghelli, Marcelo Conte, Paulo H Marchetti, Marco Carlos Uchida| 2011/5/1| | 43| 5| 946-946| LIPPINCOTT WILLIAMS & WILKINS| 
Paulo Marchetti |Training Cadence: New Insight Into Boxing Training: 3251Board# 214 June 4 9: 30 AM-11: 00 AM| Luis Felipe Milano Teixeira, Vladimir Juliano De Godoi, Arnaldo Beghelli, Marcelo Conte, Paulo H Marchetti, Marco Carlos Uchida| 2011/5/1| Medicine & Science in Sports & Exercise| 43| 5| 946| LWW| PURPOSE: Establish the cadence of movement that characterizes high and low intensity based on internal training load (ITL) and blood lactate concentration (BLC).
METHODS: 9 male boxing athletes (18, 8±1, 75 years old) were submitted to 4 identical (structure and volume) training sessions (TS) as follows:(A) jump rope, punching drills, hanging bag (1 movement per sec);(B) jump rope, punching drills, hanging bag (3 movements per sec). These sessions were considered as low (A) and high (B) intensity and each of them was repeated twice. To determine the ITL, we used the Rating Perceived Exertion (0-10) after 30'post training, and the indicated number was multiplied by TS volume (Foster et al., 2001). BLC was checked before and after TS using Accutrend Lactate (Roche). Lactate concentration was compared between high and low trainings using the Wilcoxon statistic test.
RESULTS: The delta of lactate …
Paulo Marchetti |Rectus Abdominis Muscle Activation During Low-Intensity And Fatiguing Tasks: 1965Board# 160 June 2 9: 00 AM-10: 30 AM| Paulo H Marchetti, Andre F Kohn, Marcos Duarte| 2011/5/1| Medicine & Science in Sports & Exercise| 43| 5| 495| LWW| PURPOSE: In the present study we investigated the effect of fatigue and low-intensity conditions on the selective activation of the RA during two motor tasks.
METHODS: Ten healthy adult (mean age: 26±8years) performed isometric curl-up (supine trunk raise with feet free) and leg-raise (supine bent-leg raise) exercises. In order to understand the potential selective activation of the RA, we conducted two experiments. In the first, subjects performed two controlled isometric exercises: curl up and leg raise at low-intensity. In the second experiment, subjects performed the same exercises, but they were required to maintain a force level in order to induce fatigue. We recorded the EMG activities of the lower and upper portions of the RA during the exercises and used spatial-temporal and frequency analyses to describe muscle activation patterns.
RESULTS: At low-intensity contractions, the ratio between the EMG …
Paulo Marchetti |Atividade mioelétrica máxima dos músculos vasto medial oblíquo e vasto lateral em cadeia cinética aberta e fechada.| André Serra Bley, Diego Barbosa Fonseca, Marjori do Prado de los Santos, Adriano Rodrigues| 2011| Terapia Manual| 9| 42| 54-58| | Introdução:
O alinhamento patelar, por parte dos estabilizadores dinâmicos, está diretamente relacionado ao equilíbrio na atividade muscular do Vasto Medial Oblíquo (VMO) e Vasto Lateral (VL). Alterações anatômicas e biomecânicas do membro inferior são comumente relacionadas com a etiologia da Síndrome da Dor Femoropatelar (SDFP). Estudos constataram que o controle neural não apropriado do quadríceps está relacionado a esta condição, principalmente quando a magnitude e o início da atividade mioéletrica do VMO leva desvantagem em relação ao VL.
Objetivo:
Avaliar a ativação eletromiográfica do VMO e VL, em contração isométrica voluntária máxima, em ângulos articulares específicos de 80 em cadeia cinética aberta (CCA) e de 30 em cadeia cinética fechada (CCF).
Método:
Participaram 12 voluntários (24±4 anos), sendo 9 homens. Foi realizado um estudo transversal aprovado pelo comitê de ética da Instituição. Incluídos apenas voluntários hígidos, sedentários, sem histórico de lesão ou cirurgia nos membros inferiores. Foram submetidos a aquisições eletromiográficas do VMO e VL, durante contração isométrica voluntária máxima do quadríceps em CCA a 80 e em CCF a 30. O sinal elétrico foi analisado através da atividade eletromiográfica integrada (IEMG) e então foram comparadas as tarefas (CCA e CCF) e músculos (VMO e VL) através de uma ANOVA (2x2).
Resultados:
Durante a CIVM, a IEMG dos músculos VMO e VL apresentaram diferenças significativas quando comparados entre tarefas (CCA e CCF)(p= 0, 02 e p= 0, 08, respectivamente), entretanto, não foram verificadas diferenças entre músculos para …
Paulo Marchetti |VALIDAÇÃO DO TAPETE DE CONTATO NA MENSURAÇÃO DA ALTURA DO SALTO EM JOGADORES DE BASQUETE DE ELITE VALIDITY OF CONTACT MAT FOR MEASURING JUMP HEIGHT IN ELITE BASKETBALL PLAYERS| Paulo Henrique Marchetti, Fábio Luiz Ceschini| 2010/3/22| Revista de Atenção à Saúde (antiga Rev. Bras. Ciên. Saúde)| 7| 21| | | O tapete de contato tem sido utilizado em diversos estudos e possui grande aplicação prática no treinamento e no controle esportivo. Embora a plataforma de força seja considerada o “padrão ouro” na avaliação da certas variáveis dos saltos verticais, ela requer um ambiente de laboratório, assim como um alto custo para aquisição e manutenção. Consequentemente, os testes realizados no tapete de contato constituem uma boa alternativa para a avaliação de atletas na condição esportiva, quando, muitas vezes, o acesso a um laboratório se torna impossível e inacessível. Desta forma, o objetivo do presente estudo foi mensurar os critérios de validade do tapete de contato (Ergojump Jump Pro 2.0-Brazil), comparando-se tais cálculos com os resultados do “padrão ouro” na plataforma de força. Quinze atletas de basquetebol de elite, categoria sub-21, foram submetidos a três tentativas do SCM no tapete de salto (Ergojump Jump Pro 2.0) e na plataforma de força (OR6-1000, AMTI). A altura do salto vertical foi calculada utilizando-se ambos os equipamentos. Os valores de média (±1DP) para a altura do SCM, medidos pela plataforma de força, foram 32.3±5.1 cm e, para o tapete de contato, foram 32.44. 5cm. O teste t de Student pareado não apresentou diferenças significantes entre ambas as formas de mensuração (p= 0.90). O gráfico de Bland-Altman foi construído para fornecer uma interpretação visual aos dados. Portanto, o presente estudo sugere que os SCMs avaliados no tapete de contato apresentam confiáveis e consistentes medidas para a definição da altura de salto comparadas às obtidas por meio de plataformas de força, e que …
Paulo Marchetti |Análise preliminar da assimetria nas cargas mecânicas do joelho e quadril durante o drop jump em atletas| PH Marchetti, MI Orselli, L Martins, Marcos Duarte| 2009| Resumos| | | | | MARCHETTI, PH; ORSELLI, MI; MARTINS, L.; DUARTE, Marcos. Análise preliminar da assimetria nas cargas mecânicas do joelho e quadril durante o drop jump em atletas. Anais.. São Paulo: Sociedade Brasileira de Biomecânica, 2009 … Marchetti, PH, Orselli, MI, Martins, L., & Duarte, M. (2009). Análise preliminar da assimetria nas cargas mecânicas do joelho e quadril durante o drop jump em atletas. In Resumos. São Paulo: Sociedade Brasileira de Biomecânica.
Paulo Marchetti |INFLUÊNCIA DA LATERALIDADE NAS ASSIMETRIAS MORFOLÓGICAS E FUNCIONAIS EM INDIVÍDUOS SEDENTÁRIOS INFLUENCE OF THE LATERALITY ON MORPHOLOGICAL AND FUNCTIONAL ASYMMETRIES IN …| Paulo Henrique Marchetti, Filemon Carlos dos Anjos, Priscyla Silva Monteiro Nardi, Ivani de Souza Manzzo| 2009| Revista de Atenção à Saúde (antiga Rev. Bras. Ciên. Saúde)| 7| 22| | | O ser humano apresenta características de simetria em escala macroscópica. A simetria também pode ser
Paulo Marchetti |ASPECTOS METABÓLICOS DO EXERCÍCIO INTERMITENTE METABOLIC ASPECTS OF THE INTERMITTENT EXERCISE| Paulo Henrique Marchetti, Fernando de Campos Mello| 2007| Revista de Atenção à Saúde (antiga Rev. Bras. Ciên. Saúde)| 5| 12| | | O exercício intermitente de alta intensidade e curta duração, separado por diferentes períodos de recuperação,
Paulo Marchetti |Avaliação do sinal eletromiográfico de porções do músculo reto abdominal sob fadiga no domínio de frequências| Paulo Henrique Marchetti, Marcos Duarte| 2003| Motriz| 9| 1| S166| | MARCHETTI, Paulo Henrique; DUARTE, Marcos. Avaliação do sinal eletromiográfico de porções do músculo reto abdominal sob fadiga no domínio de frequências. Motriz[Sl: sn], 2003 … Marchetti, PH, & Duarte, M. (2003). Avaliação do sinal eletromiográfico de porções do músculo reto abdominal sob fadiga no domínio de frequências. Motriz. Rio Claro … Marchetti PH, Duarte M. Avaliação do sinal eletromiográfico de porções do músculo reto abdominal sob fadiga no domínio de frequências. Motriz. 2003 ; 9( 1): S166 … Marchetti PH, Duarte M. Avaliação do sinal eletromiográfico de porções do músculo reto abdominal sob fadiga no domínio de frequências. Motriz. 2003 ; 9( 1): S166.
Paulo Marchetti |Influência da postura natural por longo tempo na postura ereta quieta em idosos saudáveis e patológicos| Sandra Ferreira, Silvana A Wieczorek, Paulo H Marchetti, Marcos Duarte| 2002| Anais| | | | | FERREIRA, Sandra MS; WIECZOREK, Silvana A.; MARCHETTI, Paulo H.; DUARTE, Marcos. Influência da postura natural por longo tempo na postura ereta quieta em idosos saudáveis e patológicos. Anais.. São Paulo: EEFE-USP, 2002 … Ferreira, SMS, Wieczorek, SA, Marchetti, PH, & Duarte, M. (2002). Influência da postura natural por longo tempo na postura ereta quieta em idosos saudáveis e patológicos. In Anais. São Paulo: EEFE-USP.
Paulo Marchetti |The effect of dominant first dorsal interosseous fatigue on the force production of| Yimeng Li, Kevin E Power, Paulo H Marchetti, David G Behm| | | | | | | Crossover and non-local muscle fatigue (NLMF) has generally focused on large muscle groups. It is unclear whether fatigue of a small muscle can result in NLMF of a larger muscle. The purpose of the present study was to examine the effect of small muscle (first dorsal interosseous; FDI) fatigue on the force and activation of contralateral homologous and larger heterologous muscles (biceps brachii, BB). Fifteen right-handed, male subjects performed three pre-test index finger abduction or elbow flexion maximum voluntary isometric contractions (MVICs) on the non-dominant side. Subsequently, they performed two 100s index finger abduction MVICs on the dominant side (experimental [fatigue] group) or rested for 5 minutes (control group). Afterwards, a single MVIC and a 12 repetition MVIC fatiguing protocol were completed with index finger abduction or elbow flexion on the non-dominant side. Force and electromyography (EMG) were measured from both sides. The force and EMG (median frequency: MDF) of nonexercised index finger abductors (IFA)/FDI and elbow flexors (EF)/BB significantly decreased after the fatiguing protocol. Compared with the control condition, the non-exercised IFA (12.5% and 5.7%) had significantly greater force and MDF fatigue indexes than the EF (5.2% and 1.7%).
Paulo Marchetti |AGACHAMENTO NEUROMECHANICAL ASPECTS OF THE SQUAT EXERCISE| Paulo Marchetti, Willy Andrade Gomes, Danilo Atanazio da Luz Jr, Daniel Takeshi Ito| | Revista CPAQV–Centro de Pesquisas Avançadas em Qualidade de Vida–ISSN| 5| 2| 2013| | Actually the strength training has been widely used in different contexts and for different purposes: athletic, recreational, esthetic and therapeutic. Undoubtedly, one of the most widely used exercises in strength training, aiming at the development of the muscles is the squat. The present study aimed to review several anatomical, biomechanical and kinesiological aspects of the squat exercise, as well as their possible variations as differences in lower limb positioning, the effects in the amplitude of the execution, differences between guided and non-guided exercise and the differences in positioning of the bar related to the trunk. The understanding of several variations can influence in the correct prescription, correction and orientation of this exercise for strength training or rehabilitation. In this way, after the review of several papers about this exercise, we can conclude that the different variations and conditions …
Paulo Marchetti |EFEITO DO ALONGAMENTO PASSIVO EXTENSIVO NO DESEMPENHO DE SÉRIES MÚLTIPLAS NO TREINAMENTO DE FORÇA| Paulo H Marchetti| | | | | | | Introdução:
Recentemente, a prática de exercícios de alongamento tem sido relacionada a um déficit no desempenho de atividades força-dependentes. Entretanto, pouco é sabido sobre seu efeito ao longo de séries consecutivas no treinamento de força.
Objetivo:
Determinar o efeito do alongamento extensivo no desempenho de séries múltiplas no treinamento de força.
Métodos:
A amostra foi composta de 12 adultos jovens, experientes com o treinamento de força. O protocolo consistiu de três sessões. A primeira delas serviu de familiarização e determinação de 10 repetições máximas no supino reto (T10RM). A segunda e terceira condições foram aleatorizadas entre os sujeitos. A primeira delas avaliou a realização do supino reto sem alongamento prévio (SEMA). A segunda delas avaliou a realização do supino reto com alongamento prévio (COMA). O alongamento consistiu de 6 séries de 45” de alongamento com 15” de intervalo para o peitoral maior. A intensidade do alongamento foi mantida entre 70 e 90% da percepção subjetiva de desconforto. Antes e após ambas as condições foi avaliada a dor local por meio de um alongamento breve e palpação. Uma ANOVA (2x6) de medidas repetidas foi utilizada para comparar o número de repetições. One-way ANOVA foi utilizada para comparar o load da primeira série de cada condição (T10RM/SEMA/COMA). Teste t de student foi utilizado para comparar o load total e a dor. Foi adotada uma significância de 5%.
Resultados:
Foi observado decréscimo no número de repetições ao longo das séries em ambas as condições. Entretanto, não foram observadas diferenças entre as condições …
Paulo Marchetti |CONTACT: willy_edfisica@ yahoo. com. br| Willy A Gomes, Lee E Brown, Enrico G Soares, Josinaldo J Silva, Érica P Serpa, Daniel A Correa, Guanis B Vilela Junior, Charles R Lopes, Paulo H Marchetti| | | | | | | Fourteen trained-men with at least one year’s training experience volunteered to participate in the study (age: 24±4 years, height: 176±6cm, body mass: 81±11kg, BS 1RM: 107±30kg). The experiment was performed in two sessions. During the first session, the maximal BS strength (1RM) was evaluated (without KW), followed by a familiarization with the use of KW. In the session two, all subjects performed 1 set of 3 repetitions (self-selected cadence) under 4 different conditions in a random order: with KW and without KW (NW) at 60% and 90% 1RM. A rest period (10 minutes) was used between conditions. The descent phase was parallel to the ground (~ 90º of knee joint flexion). The spiral wrapping technique was used. For the muscle activation evaluation, the superficial electromyography (sEMG) technique was used on vastus lateralis (VL) and gluteus maximus (GM), only in a dominant lower limb. The IEMG was calculated from the sEMG data (normalized by maximum voluntary isometric contraction, MVIC) during each trial. A repeatedmeasured ANOVA was used for all dependent variables ((wraps x intensity). Post hoc comparisons were performed with the Bonferroni’s test. An alpha of 0.05 was used.
Paulo Marchetti |proccclimentos de aquisição do sinal.| Paulo Henrique Marchetti, Marcos Duarte| | | | | | | Introdução:
A eletromiografia é uma ferramenta importante na análise clínica e esportiva, e bastante utilizada para revelar informações relacionadas ao estado de ativação do músculo.
Objetivo:
O objetivo do presente estudo foi revisar os conceitos técnicos referentes aos procedimentos para aquisição do sinal eletromiogrāfico.
Método:
Foi conduzida uma revisão sistemática da literatura utilizando as seguintes palavras-chave: eletromiografia, processamento de sinais e instrumentação.
Conclusão:
Conclui-se que a eletromiografia é uma importante ferramenta para análise clinica e esportiva em diferentes condições estāticas e dināmicas. Entretanto, cuidados com o correto processo de aquisição das informações, para cada condição, é fundamental para a fidedignidade das informações adquiridas.
Paulo Marchetti |eFeIto do ALonGAMento PAssIVo eXtensIVo nA reALIZAÇão de sÉrIes MÚLtIPLAs no sUPIno reto| PAULo HenrIQUe MArCHettI| | AnAIs 13ª MostrA ACAdêMICA UnIMeP| | | 98| | É pratica comum entre atletas e praticantes recreacionais de atividades físicas a incorporação de exercícios de alongamento e de forca a fim de melhorar a amplitude de movimento (ADM), forca e hipertrofia muscular (Behm e Chaouachi, 2011; Marchetti, oliveira Silva et al., 2014). tipicamente as sessões de treinamento de forca, uma alta intensidade associada a um elevado número de séries, é necessária a fim de exaurir a musculatura e consequentemente promover os ajustes agudos e adaptações crônicas necessárias (Zatsiorsky e Kraemer, 2008; Lin e Chen, 2012). Normalmente, indivíduos treinados realizam entre 20 e 25 series para cada grupo muscular em uma única sessão. Adicionalmente a prática do treinamento de força, a fim aumentar a amplitude de movimento, a realização de alongamento passivo é frequente entre os praticantes. Entretanto, a literatura científica demonstra que a realização de alongamento passivo extensivo tem sido relacionada a um déficit no desempenho de atividades forca-dependentes (Behm e Chaouachi, 2011). os possíveis mecanismos responsáveis pela redução da força após a realização do alongamento são:(i) a inibição dos estímulos excitatórios do motoneurônios alfa, via estimulação das terminações nervosas III, IV e órgão tendinoso de golgi,(ii) aumento do atraso eletromecânico devido a maior complacência da unidade musculo-tendínea,(iii) alteração na relação comprimento--tensão da unidade musculo-tendínea, e (iv) isquemia local devido ao menor fluxo sanguíneo e acumulo de metabolitos (Behm e Chaouachi, 2011; Marchetti, oliveira Silva et al., 2014). Coletivamente, os efeitos …
Paulo Marchetti |Acute effect of proprioceptive neuromuscular facilitation stretching protocol on dynamic postural balance| Amine Ghram, Mohamed Damak, Fatma Rhibi, Paulo Henrique Marchetti| | | | | | | This study aimed to investigate the effect of the contract-relax proprioceptive neuromuscular facilitation (CR PNF) stretching protocol on dynamic balance. Twenty healthy young male performed two sessions in a randomized order; a session with CR PNF stretching protocol, and a session without stretching protocol. Bipedal dynamic balance was measured in anterior-posterior (AP) and medio-lateral (ML) directions before and after the completion the two experimental sessions with eyes opened and closed. Results showed that there is no significant difference between two sessions in AP direction. However, in ML direction, the CR PNF stretching protocol enhanced significantly (p< 0.05) dynamic balance when compared with no stretching protocol. This study suggested that CR PNF stretching might be effective to improve dynamic balance control.
Justin Nicoll |Changes in resting mitogen-activated protein kinases following resistance exercise overreaching and overtraining| Justin X Nicoll, Andrew C Fry, Andrew J Galpin, Adam J Sterczala, Donald B Thomason, Christopher A Moore, Lawrence W Weiss, Loren ZF Chiu| 2016/12/1| European journal of applied physiology| 116| 11-12| 2401-2413| Springer Berlin Heidelberg| Purpose
Many physiological maladaptations persist after overreaching and overtraining resistance exercise (RE). However, no studies have investigated changes in mitogen-activated protein kinases (MAPK) after overtraining in humans, despite their critical role regulating exercise-induced muscular adaptations. The purpose of this study was to describe the changes in total and resting phosphorylation status of extracellular signal-regulated kinase 1/2 (ERK1/2), c-Jun NH2-terminal kinase (JNK) and p38-MAPK following a period of RE overreaching or overtraining.
Methods
Following 2–4 weeks of normal training (low volume/low intensity), two groups of males performed either a high-power overreaching protocol (HPOR n = 6, mean ± SD, age 23 ± 3.4 years, mass 86.5 ± 17.7 kg, height 1.77 ± 0.06 m) or high-intensity overtraining protocol (HIOT n = 8 …
Justin Nicoll |Effects of circadian rhythm on power, force, and hormonal response in young men| Disa L Hatfield, Justin X Nicoll, William J Kraemer| 2016/3/1| The Journal of Strength & Conditioning Research| 30| 3| 725-732| LWW| Hatfield, DL, Nicoll, JX, and Kraemer, WJ. Effects of circadian rhythm on power, force, and hormonal response in young men. J Strength Cond Res 30 (3): 725–732, 2016—Circadian rhythms (CRs) persist in many physiological systems related to performance. The effects of circadian patterns on dynamic muscular power are minimal and conflicting. Furthermore, no study to date has investigated the effect of CR on bench press throws (BPTs) despite its popularity as a modality to increase muscular power. The purpose of this study was to examine the effects of circadian variations on muscular power output and hormonal changes in men. College aged men (n= 7, age: 23.6 6 1.3 years, height: 179.9 6 5.4 cm, and body mass: 81.5 6 19.7 kg.) were recruited for this repeated measures study. Testing occurred at 4 different times of day (04: 00, 10: 00, 16: 00, and 22: 00 hours). Testosterone (T) and cortisol (C) hand …
Justin Nicoll |Muscular strength and power in 3-to 7-year-old children| Andrew C Fry, Carol C Irwin, Justin X Nicoll, David E Ferebee| 2015/8| Pediatric exercise science| 27| 3| 345-354| | To determine absolute and relative (adjusted for body mass) strength, mean power, and mean velocity for upper and lower body resistance exercises, forty-seven young boys and girls participated in maximal strength testing. Healthy young boys and girls, ages 3- to 7-years old, were tested for one-repetition maximum (1-RM) strength, and 70% of 1-RM to determine mean power and mean velocity on the chest press and leg press exercises. Adult weight machines were modified to accommodate the smaller size and lower strength levels of the children. A 2 × 4 (sex × age) ANOVA was used to determine age and sex differences in performance. No interaction or sex differences were observed for any variable at any age. 1-RM strength, mean power, and mean velocity significantly increased across ages (p ≤ .05). When adjusted for body mass, the changes were insignificant, with one exception. Relative mean power …
Justin Nicoll |Noninvasive Assessment of Skeletal Muscle Myosin Heavy Chain Expression in Trained and Untrained Men| Andrew C Fry, Terry J Housh, Joel B Cramer, Joseph P Weir, Travis W Beck, Brian K Schilling, Jonathan D Miller, Justin X Nicoll| 2017/9/1| The Journal of Strength & Conditioning Research| 31| 9| 2355-2362| LWW| Fry, AC, Housh, TJ, Cramer, JB, Weir, JP, Beck, TW, Schilling, BK, Miller, JD, and Nicoll, JX. Noninvasive assessment of skeletal muscle myosin heavy chain expression in trained and untrained men. J Strength Cond Res 31 (9): 2355–2362, 2017—Numerous conditions and types of physical activity (eg, exercise, aging, and muscle-related diseases) can influence muscle fiber types and the proteins expressed. To date, muscle fibers can only be characterized by actually obtaining a tissue sample using the invasive muscle biopsy procedure. Mechanomyography (MMG) is the assessment of the vibration properties of contracting skeletal muscle and has been proposed as a possible noninvasive method for muscle fiber analysis. Therefore, the purpose of this project was to examine the feasibility of using MMG and muscle performance measures to noninvasively assess muscle fiber characteristics. Fifteen men (5 …
Justin Nicoll |Age-related differences in twitch properties and muscle activation of the first dorsal interosseous| Jonathan D Miller, Trent J Herda, Michael A Trevino, Adam J Sterczala, Anthony B Ciccone, Justin X Nicoll| 2017/6/1| Clinical Neurophysiology| 128| 6| 925-934| Elsevier| Objective
To examine twitch force potentiation and twitch contraction duration, as well as electromyographic amplitude (EMGRMS) and motor unit mean firing rates (MFR) at targeted forces between young and old individuals in the first dorsal interosseous (FDI). Ultrasonography was used to assess muscle quality.
Methods
Twenty-two young (YG) (age = 22.6 ± 2.7 years) and 14 older (OD) (age = 62.1 ± 4.7 years) individuals completed conditioning contractions at 10% and 50% maximal voluntary contraction, (MVC) during which EMGRMS and MFRs were assessed. Evoked twitches preceded and followed the conditioning contractions. Ultrasound images were taken to quantify muscle quality (cross-sectional area [CSA] and echo intensity [EI]).
Results
No differences were found between young and old for CSA, pre-conditioning contraction twitch force, or MFRs (P > 0.05). However, OD individuals exhibited greater EI …
Justin Nicoll |Resting extracellular signal-regulated protein kinase 1/2 expression following a continuum of chronic resistance exercise training paradigms| Andrew J Galpin, Andrew C Fry, Justin X Nicoll, Christopher A Moore, Brian K Schilling, Donald B Thomason| 2016/7/2| Research in Sports Medicine| 24| 3| 298-303| Routledge| Extracellular signal-regulated protein kinase 1/2 (ERK1/2) moderates skeletal muscle growth; however, chronic responses of this protein to unique resistance exercise (RE) paradigms are yet to be explored. The purpose of this investigation was to describe the long-term response of ERK1/2 following circuit weight training (CWT), recreationally weight training (WT), powerlifting (PL) and weightlifting (WL). Independent t-tests were used to determine differences in trained groups compared to sedentary controls. Total ERK1/2 content was lower in PL and WL compared to their controls (p ≤ 0.05). Specific trained groups displayed large (WL: pERK/total-ERK; d = 1.25) and moderate (CWT: total ERK1/2; d = 0.54) effect sizes for altered kinase expression compared to controls. The results indicate ERK1/2 expression is down-regulated after chronic RE in well-trained weightlifters and powerlifters. Lower expression of this …
Justin Nicoll |Thyroid hormones and commonly cited symptoms of overtraining in collegiate female endurance runners| Justin X Nicoll, Disa L Hatfield, Kathleen J Melanson, Christopher S Nasin| 2018/1/1| European journal of applied physiology| 118| 1| 65-73| Springer Berlin Heidelberg| Purpose
Overtraining syndrome (OTS) is reported in endurance sports. Thyroid hormones (TH) regulate metabolism, mood, and energy production, and may play a role in OTS of endurance athletes. The purpose of this study was to investigate relationships in TH and symptoms of OTS in track and field endurance runners (ER).
Methods
Sixteen female track and field middle distance (MD; n = 9; age: 20.2 ± 1.5 years; ht: 167.86 ± 5.04 cm; body-mass: 57.97 ± 5.05 kg; VO2MAX: 53.62 ± 6.04 ml/kg/min) and long distance (LD; n = 7; age: 20.5 ± 1.5 years; ht: 162.48 ± 6.11 cm; body-mass: 56.15 ± 5.99 kg; VO2MAX: 61.94 ± 3.29 ml/kg/min) ER participated in this descriptive study (15-weeks). Thyroid-stimulating hormone (TSH), triiodothyronine (T 3), and thyroxine (T 4), were collected at pre-(PRE) and post-season …
Justin Nicoll |The skeletal muscle fiber: A mechanically sensitive cell| Luke A Olsen, Justin X Nicoll, Andrew C Fry| 2019/2/6| European journal of applied physiology| 119| 2| 333-349| Springer Berlin Heidelberg| The plasticity of skeletal muscle, whether an increase in size, change in metabolism, or alteration in structural properties, is in a continuous state of flux largely dependent upon physical activity. Much of the past research has expounded upon these ever-changing aspects of the muscle fiber following exercise. Specifically, endocrine and paracrine signaling have been heavily investigated lending to much of the past literature comprised of such endocrinological dynamics following muscle activity. Mechanotransduction, the ability of a cell to convert a mechanical stimulus into an intracellular biochemical response, has garnered much less attention. Recent work, however, has demonstrated the physical continuity of the muscle fiber, specifically demonstrating a continuous physical link between the extracellular matrix (ECM), cytoskeleton, and nuclear matrix as a means to rapidly regulate gene expression following a …
Justin Nicoll |Resting MAPK expression in chronically trained endurance runners| Justin X Nicoll, Andrew C Fry, Andrew J Galpin, Donald B Thomason, Christopher A Moore| 2017/10/21| European journal of sport science| 17| 9| 1194-1202| Routledge| Purpose: There is a paucity of research investigating the expression of mitogen-activated protein kinases (MAPK) in chronically trained (CT) athletes. Thus, it is unclear how MAPK may contribute to performance and muscle adaptation in CT subjects. The purpose of this study was to determine MAPK total protein, and phosphorylated expression of extracellular signal-regulated kinases 1 and 2 (ERK1/2), c-Jun N-terminal kinase (JNK), and p38-MAPK (p38) between untrained, and chronically trained runners. Methods: Tissue samples were analysed from sedentary (SED; n = 5) controls and chronically trained runners (CT; n = 5). Resting muscle biopsy samples were analysed for total-MAPK – and ratio of phosphorylated/total (p-MAPK) – ERK1/2, JNK, and p38-MAPK via western blotting. Mann–Whitney U tests and effect sizes were utilized to determine differences in total MAPK protein content and …
Justin Nicoll |Sex-based differences in resting MAPK, androgen, and glucocorticoid receptor phosphorylation in human skeletal muscle| Justin X Nicoll, Andrew C Fry, Eric M Mosier| 2019/1/1| Steroids| 141| | 23-29| Elsevier| Purpose
To determine if there is differential expression and phosphorylation of the androgen receptor (AR), glucocorticoid receptor (GR), and mitogen-activated protein kinases (MAPK) in skeletal muscle at rest between males and females.
Methods
Ten college-aged males (mean ± SD; age = 22 ± 2.4 yrs, ht = 175 ± 7 cm, body mass = 84.1 ± 11.8 kg) and ten females (mean ± SD; age = 20 ± 0.9 yrs; ht = 169 ± 7 cm; body mass = 67.1 ± 8.7 kg) reported to the laboratory following an overnight fast. Resting muscle biopsies were collected from the vastus lateralis and analyzed for total and phosphorylated GR (ser134, ser211, and ser226), total and phosphorylated AR (ser81, ser213, ser515, ser650), and total and phosphorylated MAPK (ERK, JNK, p38) via western blotting. A phosphorylation index (PI) was calculated to determine phosphorylated receptor expression after accounting …
Justin Nicoll |Thyroid hormones, performance, and psychological changes on overtraining in female distance runners| Justin Nicoll| 2014| | | | | | Statement of the Problem:
Overtraining (OT) is common in endurance sports. Perturbations in the hormonal milieu are common throughout OT literature. Thyroid hormones (TH) are altered by energy imbalances, and these imbalances are often present in female endurance athletes. Thyroid hormones also regulate metabolism, energy production, and therefore they may play a role in commonly cited symptoms of OT in these athletes. Alterations in TH status often occur slowly, and research investigating TH and their relationship in overtrained athletes is sparse.
PURPOSE:
The purpose of this study was to investigate relationships in TH and commonly cited symptoms of OT in collegiate track and field (T&F) endurance runners.
METHODS:
Sixteen female track and field middle (MD; n= 9; age: 20.21±1.49 yrs; height: 167.86±5.04 cm; body mass: 57.97±5.05 kg; VO 2MAX: 53.62±6.04 ml/kg/min) and long (LD; n= 7; age: 20.47±1.53 yrs; height: 162.48±6.11 cm; body mass: 56.15±5.99 kg; VO 2MAX: 61.94±3.29 ml/kg/min) distance runners participated in a 14 week descriptive study. Thyroid stimulating hormone (TSH), triiodothyronine (T3), and thyroxine (T4), were collected at the beginning of the indoor T&F (PRE) and end of the outdoor T&F season (POST). Dietary intake and vertical jump power (VJP) were tested at PRE, MID, and POST season. A fatigue scale was administered weekly, and percent change (ΔRT) in race time (season best vs championship performance) was calculated. Wilcoxon-sign ranked tests were used to determine changes in hormonal, dietary, and performance measures over time. Spearman’s rho correlation coefficient was …
Justin Nicoll |Skeletal muscle signaling responses to resistance exercise of the elbow extensors are not compromised by a preceding bout of aerobic exercise| Björn Hansson, Luke A Olsen, Justin X Nicoll, Ferdinand von Walden, Michael Melin, Anna Strömberg, Eric Rullman, Thomas Gustafsson, Andrew C Fry, Rodrigo Fernandez-Gonzalo, Tommy R Lundberg| 2019/4/10| American Journal of Physiology-Regulatory, Integrative and Comparative Physiology| | | | American Physiological Society| The current study examined the effects of a preceding bout of aerobic exercise (AE) on subsequent molecular signaling to resistance exercise (RE) of the elbow extensors. Eleven men performed unilateral elbow-extensor AE (~45 min at 70% peak workload) followed by unilateral RE (4×7 maximal repetitions) for both arms. Thus, one arm performed AE+RE interspersed by 15 min recovery, whereas the other arm conducted RE alone. Muscle biopsies were taken from the triceps brachii of each arm immediately before (PRE), 15 min (POST1) and 3h (POST2) after RE. Molecular markers involved in translation initiation, protein breakdown, mechanosignaling and ribosome biogenesis, were analysed. Peak power during RE was reduced by 24% (±19%) when preceded by AE (P<0.05). Increases in PGC1a and MuRF1 expression were greater from PRE to POST2 in AE+RE compared to RE (18- vs. 3.5- and 4- vs. 2 …
Justin Nicoll |Effects of Different Athletic Playing Surfaces on Jump Height, Force, and Power| Disa L Hatfield, Kelly M Murphy, Justin X Nicoll, William M Sullivan, Jason Henderson| 2019/4/1| The Journal of Strength & Conditioning Research| 33| 4| 965-973| LWW| Hatfield, DL, Murphy, KM, Nicoll, JX, Sullivan, WM, and Henderson, J. Effects of different athletic playing surfaces on jump height, force, and power. J Strength Cond Res 33 (4): 965–973, 2019—Artificial turfs (ATs) have become more commonplace. Some aspects of performance such as speed seem to be better on ATs, but there are few published studies on the effects of playing surfaces on performance. Furthermore, there is no research that compares performance on ATs, hard surfaces (HSs), and different composite natural surfaces. Fortythree subjects, 21 men (age: 20 6 1.82 years; height: 177.53 6 5.87 cm; body mass: 78.44 6 11.59 kg; and body fat: 11.17 6 4.45%) and 22 women (age: 25 6 1.32 years; height: 161.37 6 6.47 cm; body mass: 60.94 6 10.24 kg; and body fat: 27.16 6 7.08%) performed a single countermovement jump (SCMJ), repeated CMJs (RCMJs), and single depth jump (SDJ) on 4 different …
Justin Nicoll |SODIUM-POTASSIUM PUMP SUBUNIT EXPRESSION: ACUTE RESPONSES TO RESISTANCE EXERCISE IN TRAINED MEN| SA Sontag, JX Nicoll, EM Mosier, AC Fry| 2019| International Journal of Exercise Science: Conference Proceedings| 11| 6| 68| | Stephanie A. Sontag 1, Justin X. Nicoll 2, Eric M. Mosier 3, Andrew C. Fry 1
Justin Nicoll |TEST-RETEST RELIABILITY OF PERFORMANCE SCORES USING A MARKERLESS MOTION CAPTURE SYSTEM| EM Mosier, AC Fry, JX Nicoll, D Cabarkapa| 2019| International Journal of Exercise Science: Conference Proceedings| 11| 6| 53| | Eric M. Mosier 1, Andrew C. Fry 2, Justin X. Nicoll 3, Dimitrije Cabarkapa 2.
Justin Nicoll |MARKERLESS MOTION CAPTURE SYSTEM–INTER-DEVICE RELIABILITY| D Cabarkapa, EM Mosier, JX Nicoll, PG Moodie, AC Fry| 2019| International Journal of Exercise Science: Conference Proceedings| 11| 6| 12| | Dimitrije Cabarkapa 1, Eric M. Mosier 2, Justin X. Nicoll 3, Patrick G. Moodie 4, Andrew C. Fry 1
Justin Nicoll |MAPK Signaling and Intracellular Hormone Receptor Phosphorylation at Rest and Following Resistance Training| Justin Nicoll| 2018/5/31| | | | | | Mitogen-activated protein kinases (MAPK) ERK, JNK, and p38 are a family of signal transduction proteins that respond to diverse forms of physiological stress including exercise. MAPK appear to mediate several adaptations to exercise skeletal muscle however most of their data are limited to cell culture, animal or endurance training study designs. Increasing evidence suggests they mediate translational efficiency and capacity. Further, recent data indicates they can regulate the steroid androgen (AR) and glucocorticoid (GR) receptors via phosphorylation. However, there are no data investigating AR and GR phosphorylation in humans or their response to resistance exercise (RE). Thus, understanding how MAPK, AR, and GR phosphorylation respond during resistance exercise will give us better insight to their specific roles in muscle adaptation. This dissertation investigated the activation of MAPK and epinephrine receptor signaling to a caffeine containing pre-workout supplement during resistance exercise. Further, we also described MAPK expression and phosphorylated AR and GR in resting skeletal muscle between males and females. Finally, we conducted a training study to determine differences in MAPK, AR, and GR phosphorylation following a period of stressful resistance training. The results of this dissertation indicates 1) pre-workout supplementation improves performance but does not enhance MAPK or epinephrine receptor signaling early after RE, 2) males and females express different expression of phosphorylated AR, GR, and p38 at rest, 3) MAPK and phosphorylated AR and GR are activated after acute RE and are …
Justin Nicoll |Pre-workout Supplementation Does Not Augment Intramuscular Mapk Phosphorylation Immediately Following an Acute Resistance Exercise Bout: 2279 Board# 115 June 1 9| Justin X Nicoll, Andrew C Fry, Eric M Mosier| 2018/5/1| Medicine & Science in Sports & Exercise| 50| 5S| 558| Medicine & Science in Sports & Exercise| METHODS: In a randomized, counter-balanced, double-blind, placebo-controlled, within-subject crossover study, ten resistance-trained males ((M±SD, age= 22±2.4 yrs, hgt= 175±7 cm, body mass= 84.1±11.8 kg) performed four sets of 8 repetitions of barbell back squats at 75% of their 1-repetition maximum (1-RM) with two minutes of rest between sets and a fifth set of barbell back squats at 60% of 1-RM until concentric failure. A PWS or flavor and color matched placebo (PL) was consumed 60-minutes prior to RE. Muscle biopsies were taken from the vastus lateralis prior to supplementation at rest (BL), and ten minutes post-exercise (POST). Biopsy samples were analyzed for the ratio of (pMAPK/totalMAPK) of extracellular signal-regulated kinase (ERK), c-Jun NH2-terminal kinase (JNK), and p38 via western blotting. Wilcoxon sign-rank tests were utilized to determine pairwise differences from BL to POST and …
Justin Nicoll |The Effect of Three Different Maximal Concentric Velocity Squat Protocols on MAPK Phosphorylation and Endocrine Responses.| Rebecca A Kudrna, Andrew C Fry, Justin X Nicoll, Phillip M Gallagher, Michael R Prewitt| 2017/12/27| Journal of strength and conditioning research| | | | | The purpose of this study was to determine the effect of three different back squat protocols on 2 intra-cellular signaling, endocrine responses, and power fatigue. Nine recreationally trained 3 males (X±SD; age: 21.4±0.6 yrs; height: 177.8±5.1 cm; weight: 78.7±9.7 kg), completed three 4 maximal concentric velocity squat protocols in a randomized order. Testing protocols consisted 5 of 5 sets of 10 repetitions at 30% of 1RM; 5 sets of 5 repetitions at 70% of 1RM; and 5 sets of 3 6 repetitions at 90% of 1RM. Average system power for each set was obtained with a tethered 7 external dynamometer. Pre-and post-exercise blood draws were analyzed for lactate, 8 testosterone, hGH, and cortisol. Muscle biopsies assessed pre-and post-exercise extracellular 9 signal-regulated kinase 1/2 (ERK1/2) and p38 phosphorylation via western blotting. Cortisol, 10 hGH, and lactate increased post-exercise (p< 0.05), but did not differ between protocols (p> 0.05). 11 Testosterone was unaltered (p> 0.05). Average power was lower for the 90% protocol than for the 12 30% protocol across all sets (p< 0.01). Average power was lower after the fourth and fifth set 13 compared to the first and second set in the 90% protocol only (p< 0.05). The ratio of 14 phosphorylated-to-total ERK1/2 was higher post-exercise after 90% protocol only (p< 0.05). The 15 ratio of phosphorylated-to-total p38 was unaltered post-exercise (p> 0.05). Resistance load 16 appears to affect power fatigue across the five sets of resistance exercise. This study found 17 modest changes in ERK1/2 and no changes in p38 phosphorylation following maximal 18 concentric velocity squats. Exercise volume …
Justin Nicoll |β2-adrenergic receptor maladaptations to high power resistance exercise overreaching| AJ Sterczala, AC Fry, LZF Chiu, BK Schilling, LW Weiss, JX Nicoll| 2017/7/1| Human Physiology| 43| 4| 446-454| Pleiades Publishing| The effects of a recovery drink on overreaching induced by high frequency, high power resistance exercise was assessed. Resistance trained men were assigned to a supplemented (SUP, n = 8), placebo (PL, n = 3) or control (CON, n = 6) groups. All groups completed two weeks of familiarization training using the barbell squat. In week three, SUP and PL performed ten sets of five repetitions of speed squats twice daily, for a total of 15 training sessions. CON maintained their prior training schedule. Data were collected before week three (T1), after week three (T2) and after a week of recovery by training cessation (T3). During week three, SUP consumed an amino acid, carbohydrate and creatine monohydrate containing recovery drink immediately after each training bout. PL was provided a drink of similar appearance and taste but containing minimal nutritional value. At T2, both SUP and PL decreased …
Justin Nicoll |Motor Unit Action Potential Sizes of the First Dorsal Interosseous in Young and Older Individuals: 3610 Board# 57 June 3 930 AM-1100 AM| Adam J Sterczala, Jonathan D Miller, Anthony B Ciccone, Michael A Trevino, Justin X Nicoll, Trent J Herda| 2017/5/1| Medicine & Science in Sports & Exercise| 49| 5S| 1029| LWW| METHODS: Twenty two young (YG, age= 22.5±2.7 yrs) and ten aged (OG, 61.0±2.0 yrs) subjects completed the investigation. Surface electromyography signals were recorded from the first dorsal interosseous (FDI) during an isometric trapezoidal muscle action with the steady force plateau set at 50% maximal voluntary contraction (MVC). The signals were decomposed to yield MUAP sizes and RTs for each MU. The AP slope was calculated via the MUAP sizes vs. RT relationships for MUs recruited between 10 and 50% MVC for each subject. Few MUs with RTs< 10% MVC were observed in young or old and, thus, these MUs were excluded from the slope calculation. FDI cross-sectional area (CSA) and echo intensity (EI) were quantified using ultrasonography. Possible differences in AP slope, CSA and EI between groups were examined with independent samples t-tests.
RESULTS: OG demonstrated significantly …
Justin Nicoll |Comparisons of Volume between Agonist-Antagonist Paired Sets and Traditional Sets: 1636 Board# 289 June 2, 800 AM-930 AM| Veronika Pribyslavska, Brett A Davis, John M Coons| 2016/5/1| Medicine & Science in Sports & Exercise| 48| 5S| 453| LWW| PURPOSE: The current study compared set and total volumes between traditional (TRA) and APS resistance training during a flat bench press.
METHODS: Nineteen male participants (age= 22.47±1.80 years; height= 176.95±6.53 cm; weight= 93.14±28.08 kg) completed three resistance training sessions. One repetition maximum (RM) bench press and 20 RM seated cable rows were measured during the first session. Trial two and three were the experimental sessions consisting of TRA or APS protocols conducted in a randomized, counterbalanced design. During the trials, three sets of bench press to volitional failure (80% 1RM) were completed with 3-minute rest intervals between each set. During APS protocol, the rest period included 10 repetitions of seated cable rows (20RM load).
RESULTS: The mean 1RM bench press, 80% 1RM bench press, and 20RM cable rows was 124.2±23.5 kg, 99.8±19.3 kg, and 51.0 …
Justin Nicoll |Beta2-Adrenergic Sensitivity Prior to Training is Related to ERK MAPK Down-regulation Following Resistance Exercise Overtraining.| Justin X Nicoll, Adam J Sterczala, Andrew C Fry| 2016/5/1| | 48| 5| 453-453| LIPPINCOTT WILLIAMS & WILKINS| Epinephrine (E) and norepinephrine (NE) basal excretion, and beta2-adrenergic (β2) receptor content are altered after overtraining (OT). Recent literature implicates β2 signaling in the maintenance of skeletal muscle mass and phenotype. β2 signaling in skeletal muscle involves the signaling protein extracellular signal-regulated kinase (ERK). To date, no study has investigated the E-β2-ERK signaling axis in OT humans.
PURPOSE:
To determine if basal sensitivity of epinephrine (E/β2) and norepinephrine (NE/β2) were related to changes in ERK activity following a period of resistance exercise OT.
METHODS:
Sixteen males were randomized into an overtraining group (OT: n= 8, age= 20.6±2.1 yrs, ht= 179±10cm, body mass= 78.6±12.1 kg) or control group (CON n= 8, age= 19.8±1.7 yrs, ht= 179±6cm, body mass= 76.7±9.7 kg). The OT group performed 10 X 1 at 100% 1 RM daily for 2 wks. CON performed normal training 2 days/wk. Muscle biopsies from the vastus lateralis muscle and nocturnal urinary E and NE were assessed before (pre) and after (post) overtraining. Biopsies were analyzed for total-ERK and ratio of phosphorylated ERK (pERK) via western blotting. The ratio of pERK was corrected for changes in total-ERK content between pre and post training. Multiple regression was used to determine if E/β2 and NE/β2 (independent variables) were significantly related to changes in pERK (dependent variable) after training. Significance was set at p<. 05.
RESULTS:
When groups were analyzed together, E/β2 and NE/β2 at pre explained 64% of variance in the change of pERK at post (F [2, 13]= 14.4, p=. 001, adj. R 2=. 641). When analyzed …
Justin Nicoll |Reliability and Repeatability of Countermovement Jump Waveforms: 403 Board# 240 June 1, 1100 AM-1230 PM| Adam J Sterczala, Justin X Nicoll, Jake A Deckert, Alexander R Bryce, Joseph P Weir| 2016/5/1| Medicine & Science in Sports & Exercise| 48| 5S| 111| LWW| PURPOSE: To determine the within day and between day reliability of the CMJ GRF waveform in healthy individuals.
METHODS: Twenty-five healthy (age= 21.5±1.9 years), recreationally active men and women completed one familiarization and three experimental visits, a minimum of 48 hours apart. Each visit consisted of a brief, standardized warmup, two submaximal CMJs, and three maximal CMJs performed on a force plate (sample rate= 1000Hz). Each jump was separated by two minutes. To reduce the variability associated with arm swing, all jumps were performed with subjects’ hands on their hips. The CMJ GRF waveform for each jump, beginning with the minimum GRF during the counter-movement and ending at take off, was interpolated and re-sampled to a uniform length of 1000 data points. Individual within and between day reliabilities for each subject’s waveform shapes were calculated using the …
Justin Nicoll |Comparisons of Volume between Agonist-Antagonist Paired Sets and Traditional Sets| Justin X Nicoll, Adam J Sterczala, Andrew C Fry| 2016| | | | | | PURPOSE:
The current study compared set and total volumes between traditional (TRA) and APS resistance training during a flat bench press.
METHODS:
Nineteen male participants (age= 22.47±1.80 years; height= 176.95±6.53 cm; weight= 93.14±28.08 kg) completed three resistance training sessions. One repetition maximum (RM) bench press and 20 RM seated cable rows were measured during the first session. Trial two and three were the experimental sessions consisting of TRA or APS protocols conducted in a randomized, counterbalanced design. During the trials, three sets of bench press to volitional failure (80% 1RM) were completed with 3-minute rest intervals between each set. During APS protocol, the rest period included 10 repetitions of seated cable rows (20RM load).
RESULTS:
The mean 1RM bench press, 80% 1RM bench press, and 20RM cable rows was 124.2±23.5 kg, 99.8±19.3 kg, and 51.0±7.24 kg, respectively. A two-factor repeated measures analysis of variance revealed significant decreases in volume for both TRA (set 1: 1632.7±386.4 kg; set 2: 1190.0±209.2 kg; set 3: 930.1±172.4 kg) and APS (set 1: 1579.1±332.8 kg; set 2: 1172.0±269.6 kg; set 3: 909.1±232.4 kg) as the sets progressed through the exercise session (p<. 001). These decreases were similar between both methods (p=. 471). There was not a significant interaction of volume between the APS and TRA groups (p=. 772).
CONCLUSION:
The results indicate that there were no differences in volume between TRA and APS resistance session. The APS training appears to be a time efficient alternative to TRA resistance training.
Justin Nicoll |RESTING MAPK EXPRESSION REMAINS STABLE AFTER 1-WEEK CESSATION OF RESISTANCE EXERCISE TRAINING.| Justin X Nicoll, Adam J Sterczala, Andrew C Fry| 2015| International Journal of Exercise Science: Conference Proceedings| 11| 3| 56| | Conclusions
Expression of most MAPK (ie ERK and p38) remain stable following short-term maintenance RE. Furthermore, total and pJNK/totalJNK may differentially alter their resting expression depending on the phase and training stresses (or lack thereof) placed on muscle tissue.
Justin Nicoll |THE RELATIONSHIP BETWEEN PERFORMANCE DECREMENTS AND PEAK EMG AMPLITUDE FOLLOWING RESISTANCE EXERCISE OVERREACHING| AJ Sterczala, JX Nicoll, AC Fry| 2015| International Journal of Exercise Science: Conference Proceedings| 11| 3| 63| | Adam J. Sterczala 1, Justin X. Nicoll 1, and Andrew C. Fry 1. 1 Dept. of Health, Sport and Exercise Sciences, University of Kansas, Lawrence, KS; e-mail: adam. j. sterczala@ ku. edu
Justin Nicoll |The Use Of Fatigue And Power As Early Indicators Of Overtraining In Female Runners| Justin Nicoll, Disa Hatfield, Ryan Keith, Kathleen Melanson, Christopher Nasin, Deborah Riebe| 2014/5/1| | 46| 5| 950-950| LIPPINCOTT WILLIAMS & WILKINS| The purpose of this study was to describe the relationship between overtraining symptoms of fatigue, and performance (eg vertical jump power, race times) changes over a track season in female collegiate endurance athletes
Justin Nicoll |TESTING MODALITY IS VITAL TO DETECT PERFORMANCE CHANGES IN OVERREACHING RESISTANCE EXERCISE| J Nicoll, AC Fry, LZF Chiu, BK Schilling, LW Weiss FACSM| 2014| International Journal of Exercise Science: Conference Proceedings| 11| 2| 42| | Justin Nicoll 1, Andrew C. Fry 1, Loren ZF Chiu 2, Brian K. Schilling 3 & Lawrence W. Weiss 3, FACSM
Justin Nicoll |THE RELATIONSHIP BETWEEN SLEEP, BURN OUT, AND PERFORMANCE IN COLLEGIATE FEMALE RUNNERS.| David J Sanders, Disa Hatfield, Justin Nicoll, Kathleen Melanson, Christopher Nasin, Deborah Riebe| | | | | | | Overtraining (OT) frequently occurs in collegiate athletes. Currently, energy imbalance is considered the primary mechanisms responsible for OT. However, there is little research concerning potential early OT identifiers that coaches and athletes can easily monitor, such as sleep habits and daily fluctuations in fatigue.
PURPOSE:
The purpose of this study was to describe the relationship between fatigue, sleep, perception of burn-out, and performance change over a track season in female collegiate runners.
METHODS:
Sixteen female track and field mid and long distance runners (age: 20.34±1.47 yrs; height: 165.17±6.08 cm; body mass: 57.06±5.44 kg; VO2MAX: 58.24±5.92 ml/kg/min) participated in a 14-week descriptive study. Sleep (latency, quality, disturbance, daytime dysfunction), burn-out (reduced accomplishment, emotional/physical exhaustion, devaluation), and fatigue surveys were measured pre-, mid-, and end of-season. Percent change in race time (season best vs. championship performance) was calculated and Spearman rank order correlations were run to assess possible relationships among the variables. Significance was set at p≤ 0.05.
RESULTS:
There were significant correlations between sleep latency and burn-out exhaustion pre-and mid-season (r= 0.555 and r= 0.558), sleep latency and performance mid-season (r=-. 729), and sleep related daytime dysfunction and all characteristics of burn-out end of-season (reduced accomplishment: r= 0.574; devaluement: r= 0.666; and exhaustion: r= 0.672).
CONCLUSION:
Monitoring sleep patterns and burn-out during a competitive season may be of use to coaches in order to …
Justin Nicoll |Testing Modality is Vital to Determine Performance Changes in Overreaching Resistance Exercise| Justin Nicoll, Andrew C Fry, Loren ZF Chiu, Brian K Schilling| | | | | | | CONCLUSION: Resistance exercise performance decrements were similar to previous investigations (1, 3). However, only dynamic RE (barbell squat) was sensitive enough to detect decreased performance compared to isometric RE (knee extension) in overreached subjects. Similarly, it appears power and velocity are more adversely affected by OR than measures of maximal force. Immediate mechanisms are not clear why only dynamic exercise was impaired in this study. Decreases in performance in the barbell exercise may be due to the greater reliance on more elaborate systems of neuromuscular coordination and muscle activation. This may further be supported by the finding that components of muscle performance that required higher speed output (power and velocity) were decreased in the barbell exercise. Periodically assessing power and velocity on barbell squats at 70% of 1-RM might be a useful tool for strength and weightlifting coaches during various stages of periodized programs to assess the efficacy of the implemented overload period.
Justin Nicoll |THE EFFECT OF PLAYING SURFACE ON MARKERS OF ATHLETIC PERFORMANCE| David J Sanders, Kelly M Murphy, Justin X Nicoll, Chelsey Da Silva, Lisa Vincent-Horta, Disa L Hatfield| | | | | | | Discussion
Figure 2: Values are presented as means±SD. Represents all subjects mean peak power for Single Countermovement Jump (SCMJ) for each surface. For men and women peak power were significantly lower on NT1 when compared to all other playing surfaces.(1530±389W vs. 2369±866W, 2312±945W, 2245±796W). Men had significantly higher power and on all surfaces compared to women.
Justin Nicoll |RELIABILITY AND VALIDITY OF THE MANUAL SIDE-LYING HIP ABDUCTION GLUTEUS MEDIUS ACTIVATION ASSESSMENT IN THE STRENGTH AND CONDITIONING FIELD| Justin Nicoll, Richard S Nadell, Disa L Hatfield| | | | | | | Results
▪ The participants were graded on GM strength based previous criteria (1). The test was graded on a scale of 1-5. Grades 1 and 2 dealt with basic supine hip abduction they were not relevant and were not used in the study. Grades 3 to 5 indicate the participant’s ability to hold the leg against gravity, gravity plus moderate resistance or gravity plus maximum resistance. Therefore all participants were graded from 3-5 on strength of GM.
▪ Side lying hip abduction (Grade 3)-Side lying hip abduction (bottom leg bent). Leg extended at the kneed joint, slightly extended at the hip joint. Participant can abduct leg at the hip joint through full range of motion without backward movement of the pelvis, flexion or internal rotation of the hip. Side lying hip abduction (Grade 4, 5)-Same as grade 3 except with resistance from tester applied to the lateral aspect of the knee
Stuart Pardau |Alternative Litigation Financing: Perils and Opportunities| Stuart L Pardau| 2011| UC Davis Bus. LJ| 12| | 65| | Alternative litigation finance (" ALF") applies to situations where a claimant accepts funding for litigation from an unrelated third party. Although this arrangement provides relief to claimants who otherwise are unable to afford legal representation, it poses the possible danger of unfair influence exercised by ALF providers through the use of usurious interest rates and unconscionable terms of the agreement. Other legal issues that arise out of the context of ALF involve champerty, maintenance, and barratry, depending on the jurisdiction. The release of confidential client information to ALF providers may constitute waive of the attorney-client privilege. Attorneys even face conflict of interest issues between their clients and ALF providers, and as a result, they may lose independence in their professional judgment. Furthermore, ethical rules prohibit an attorney from splitting fees with non-attorneys. Despite these legal …
Stuart Pardau |Bill, Baby, Bill: How the Billable Hour Emerged as the Primary Method of Attorney Fee Generation and Why Early Reports of Its Demise May Be Greatly Exaggerated| Stuart L Pardau| 2013| Idaho L. Rev.| 50| | 1| | There is perhaps nothing so uniquely identified with the practice of law, certainly nothing so central to the lawyer's daily life, as the billable hour. While the
* The title is a play on the phrase" drill, baby, drill," which gained prominence during the 2008 US Presidential Campaign. The phrase was utilized by the McCain-Palin ticket to call for increased domestic production of oil. The former Chairman of the Republican National Committee, Michael Steele, has been cited as one of the first people to use the" drill, baby, drill" phrase, during his speech at the 2008
Stuart Pardau |The FTC, the Unfairness Doctrine, and Privacy by Design: New Legal Frontiers in Cybersecurity| Stuart L Pardau, Blake Edwards| 2016| J. Bus. & Tech. L.| 12| | 227| | A. From Trust Busters to the Golden Rule B. The Two Prongs of Section 5 C. Experiments in Self-Regulation D. A De Facto Cybersecurity Agency
Stuart Pardau |The ethical implications of cloud computing for lawyers| Stuart L Pardau, Blake Edwards| 2014| J. Marshall J. Info. Tech. & Privacy L.| 31| | 69| | In late 2010 Australian mining and petroleum company BHP Billiton Ltd.(" Billiton") was working on a $38 billion deal for the acquisition of Saskatchewan-based Potash Corp.(" Potash") when hackers launched a cyber-attack against Toronto law firms involved in the transaction, including prominent" Bay Street" firms Blake Cassels & Graydon LLP (representing BHP Billiton) and Stikeman Elliott LLP (representing Royal Bank of Canada). 1 Billiton's acquisition of Potash would have made Billiton the world's foremost producer of potash, and some observers suspected that the Chinese government sponsored the attack to protect the interests of Sinochem Group, China's state-owned chemicals and fertilizer company. 2 The Billiton-Potash deal ultimately fell through, allegedly for other reasons, and the law firms involved insisted
Stuart Pardau |But I'm Just a Lawyer: Do Cloud Ethics Opinions Ask Too Much| Stuart L Pardau| 2013| Prof. Law.| 22| | 37| | Published in The Professional Lawyer, Volume 22, Number 4,@ 2014 by the American Bar Association. Reproduced with permission. All rights reserved. This information or any portion thereof may not be copied or disseminated in any form or by any means or stored in an electronic database or retrieval system without the express written consent of the American Bar Association.
Stuart Pardau |The Ethical Implications of Cloud Computing for Lawyers, 31 J. Marshall J. Info. Tech. & Privacy L. 71 (2014)| Stuart Pardau, Blake Edwards| 2014| The John Marshall Journal of Information Technology & Privacy Law| 31| 1| 4| | This paper aims to isolate the pertinent ethical issues of cloud computing and chart a sensible path forward for lawyers. Part II briefly introduces the concept of cloud computing. Part III discusses the lawyer‟ s duties of confidentiality, of competence, to protect client property, and to oversee non-lawyers who are providing assistance. Part III also examines the application of these duties by the various state bar associations to the problem of cloud computing. Part IV looks at sample terms of use of some of the more popular vendors. Part V suggests that securing informed consent, employing specialty cloud providers, and purchasing cyber insurance provide more practical ways to ensure a lawyer doesn't run afoul of his ethical obligations.
Nanci Carr |Social media policies: Managing risks in a rapidly developing technological environment| Nanci K Carr, Steven P Maier| 2013| Mustang Journal of Law and Legal Studies| 4| | | | With ubiquitous social media and corporate websites as integral components of our professional and personal lives, businesses large and small leave themselves vulnerable to issues related to reputational risk, employer liability for intellectual property infringement, false advertising, regulatory breaches, defamation, unfair competition, NLRB complaints, employment law, public policy, harassment and disclosure of trade secrets. Enterprises ranging from local restaurants to large multinational corporations are susceptible to a wide spectrum of time-consuming and potentially expensive legal and management problems without having developed and implemented detailed and thoughtful policies regarding the use of and participation in social media by employees. These policies must then be incorporated into the fabric of the enterprise, regularly updated and communicated as part of a consistent program of training and compliance.
Nanci Carr |Intellectual Property Issues Associated with Biorepositories: Current Practices| Nanci Carr| 2014/8/1| Atlantic Law Journal| 16| | | | As technological innovation over the last 20 years has offered ever more opportunity for the development of diagnostic and therapeutic inventions at the genomic and proteomic level, the leading edge of medical research today is increasingly found slicing through large collections of biospecimens held in government, university and private repositories. Specimens are collected from a variety of human sources for a particular purpose and then stored for future research and study. Beyond the ethical and regulatory considerations that are rich with conflicting public interests, the determination of who owns the potentially valuable intellectual property rights must be weighed against the unfettered need to promote further research and innovation that follows from data sharing and timely disclosure of results and inventions. With that in mind, what are the current practices regarding the disposition of intellectual property rights, or economic interests therein, that arise out of the study of human tissue specimens held in biorepositories and the use of the biologic information each of those specimens contains?
Nanci Carr |Improve Student Success with Classroom Technology Use by Applying the Five Gears for Activating Learning| Nanci Carr| 2018/9/18| | | | | | In the age of over three million apps available in multiple app stores, and with more added every day, we often reach to technology to assist us with everything from creating our grocery lists to paying our bills. Similarly, we look to technology to improve the classroom experience for both teachers and students. However, we need to be careful to use the right tool for the job, rather than finding a job for the tool. So, how do we do that? By focusing our courses with the Five Gears for Activating Learning, we can integrate technology tools only if they assist in supporting student success and achieving student learning outcomes.
Nanci Carr |Material Transfer and Data Use Agreements| Nanci K Carr, Irene Shin, Steven Maier| 2017/3/1| Journal of Clinical Research Best Practices| 13| 3| | | Medical research often involves the use and analysis of various materials developed and held by one entity and provided to researchers in another entity pursuant to terms and conditions set forth in a Material Transfer Agreement (“MTA”). Such materials might include human tissue specimens, cell lines, plant varieties, bacteria, transgenic animals (which are frequently mice and other rodents), compounds, proteins, peptides, nucleotides, plasmids, vectors, antibodies, pharmaceuticals and other chemicals or biological substances.
Transfers of human biological materials and associated information are becoming more common as the analysis of large cohorts of data and/or specimens are proving essential to advances in medical care and treatment, especially in the area of personalized medicine. 1 This article will focus on the terms typically found in an MTA for the transfer of human biological materials and associated information.
Nanci Carr |Stealing Time: The Propriety of Alleging Common Law Conversion in Modern Wage Theft Lawsuits| Hilary M Goldberg, Nanci K Carr, Paul J Silvia| 2017| JL & Com.| 36| | 1| | The words" wage theft" frequently make headlines when workers sue employers for underpayment or nonpayment of wages.'Wage theft is" the illegal refusal by an employer to pay a worker the wages and benefits that he or she has legally earned." 2 In the United States, employer violation of wage and hour laws is a vast and enduring problem affecting as many as two-thirds of workers. In an attempt to combat this epidemic threat to hourly workers' bottom lines, legislatures have fashioned numerous laws, some even invoking the power of" wage theft" terminology, such as New York's Wage
Nanci Carr |When Does Compensation for'Time Spent Under the Employer's Control'Include Pre and Post Shift Waiting and Other Activities?| Nanci Carr, Hilary Goldberg| 2014/10/1| Southern Journal of Business & Ethics (October 2014)| | | | | In the face of continued economic uncertainly, employers are increasingly turning to temporary staffing to meet immediate workforce needs as a way of filling a current staffing gap without investing in a long-term commitment to an employee. The Fair Labor Standards Act of 1938 requires that employers pay employees, including temporary employees, for all “hours worked,” so the question is what constitutes hours worked for the temporary worker? The answer generally comes down to “time spent under the employer’s control” but what does that mean? Does the employer need to exercise control over the employees’ choices, or just their actions?
Nanci Carr |Social media policies: Managing risks in a rapidly developing technological environment| Nanci K Carr, Steven P Maier| 2013| Mustang Journal of Law and Legal Studies| 4| | | | With ubiquitous social media and corporate websites as integral components of our professional and personal lives, businesses large and small leave themselves vulnerable to issues related to reputational risk, employer liability for intellectual property infringement, false advertising, regulatory breaches, defamation, unfair competition, NLRB complaints, employment law, public policy, harassment and disclosure of trade secrets. Enterprises ranging from local restaurants to large multinational corporations are susceptible to a wide spectrum of time-consuming and potentially expensive legal and management problems without having developed and implemented detailed and thoughtful policies regarding the use of and participation in social media by employees. These policies must then be incorporated into the fabric of the enterprise, regularly updated and communicated as part of a consistent program of training and compliance.
